
--- Page 1 ---

THIRTEENTH REVISED EDITION 2020
) ’ The Most Advanced Theory Manuals

for Pilot Training

CPL/ATPL Padpilot

at Smarter Education for your

ATC AND FLIGHT DISPATCHER EXAMINATIONS _ Future Career

INCORPORATING
e@ AS PER DGCA’S REVISED SYLLABUS
@ TOPIC WISE QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS INCLUDED
@ SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS
e@ MORE THAN 1100 QUESTIONS WITH ANSWERS

nm, me
|
= =S —— — a 7 = — ar hare 7]

a’ =r +. 12 eee
|

www.padpilot.eu

Order Through “Sterling Book House”

For More information, please write to us,
amin@sterlingbookhouse,com


--- Page 2 ---

AIR REGULATIONS

FOR
CPL, ATPL,

ATC AND FLIGHT DISPATCHER EXAMINATIONS

APPROVED BY DGCA
AS STUDY MATERIAL FOR

PPL, CPL AND ATPLEXAMS
Wg. Cdr. R.K. BALI (Retd.)

e AS PER DGCA'S REVISED SYLLABUS
e TOPIC WISE QUESTIONS AND ANSIVERS INCLUDED
o SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS
eo MORE THAN 1100 QUESTIONS WITH ANSWERS

--- Page 3 ---

AIR REGULATIONS
FOR

CPL, ATPL,

ATC AND FLIGHT DISPATCHER EXAMINATIONS

Wg. Cdr. R.K. BALI (Retd.)

£

Sterling Book House

ISO 9001 : 2015
181, Dr. D.N. Road, Fort, Mumbai 400 001. INDIA
Tel: (+91 22) 22612521, 22659599, 22676046
Fax: (+91 22) 22623551. email: info@sterlingbookhouse.com
Website: www.sterlingbookhouse.com

Air Regulations For CPL, ATPL
By Wg. Cdr. R.K. Bali (Retd.)

Chief Executive Officer

MYWING AVIATION ACADEMY

202, A BLOCK, SAHANI TOWERS, NEAR RAJENDRA NAGAR METRO STATION,
SAHIBABAD, GHAZIABAD. PIN: 201005

Tel: 09899809930, 09873928930

E-mail: rksb4953@gmail.com * av_int@yahoo.co.in

Website: http://www.mywings.co.in
https://https://www.facebook.com/Indianaviation-3858038355800 1 6/

© Wg. Cdr. R.K. Bali (Retd.)

First Edition: 2005

Tenth Revised Edition: 2017
Eleventh Revised Edition: 2018
Twelfth Revised Edition: 2019
Thirteenth Revised Edition: 2020

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be produced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, magnetic tape, mechanical, photocopying or

otherwise without prior permission in writing from the Publishers.

PRICE: Rs. 1050.00

ISBN 13: 978-81-7598-196-6

Published in India by:

B

Sterling Book House

10 9001 : 2015

Printed and Bound in India by:
Decora Book Prints Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai

--- Page 4 ---

PREFACE

DGCA has come out with a new syllabus. Several new topics have been added which
were never required in the past. This posed a big challenge for anyone to consolidate
all topics into one book. Fact that the syllabus includes 18 ICAO Annexes, Doc 4444,
Doc 8168, AIP India, several DGCA’S CARs, Aircraft Act and Rules, material on
Human aspects, radiotelephony and several other ICAO, National and International
documents. The material runs into thousands of pages. At one stage I had thought
it to be an impossible task. On persistent inspiration from several aviators, I did a
lot of juggling to put all the pieces together. There was also request from readers to
accommodate sample questions in the book. I have managed to do so. I have spent
several sleepless nights to come out with this book. I hope it proves to be worth the
trouble and benefits all aviation enthusiasts.

Ghaziabad, Wg. Cdr. R.K. Bali (Retd.)
January 2012 Mywings Aviation Academy
M-9899809930.

--- Page 5 ---

PREFACE 13™ EDITION

In the fast moving Aviation field rules keep changing very fast. Therefore this book
needs frequent updates to keep in pace with developments. The current edition aims
to incorporate several changes in recent times.

Let me once again thank the aviation community for continued support to enable me
to bring out updated editions at short intervals.

Ghaziabad, Wg. Cdr. R.K. Bali (Retd.)
May 2020 Mywings Aviation Academy
M-9899809930.

FOR UPDATES AND CORRECTIONS VISIT:
http://www.mywings.co.in

vii

--- Page 6 ---

Chapter

—_

eo FNP AF OD

= =2— rn. =
o NO SF SP

14.
15.
16.

CONTENT

Definitions And Abbreviations

international Organisations and Conventions
Aircraft Nationality and Registration Marks
Rules of the Air

Air Traffic Services

Area Control Service

Approach Control Service

Procedures for Aerodrome Control Service
Use of Air Traffic Services Surveillance System
Aeronautical Information Services

Search and Rescue

Visual Aids for Navigation

Procedures for Air Navigation Services
Aircraft Operations

National Law
Personnel Licensing

Airworthiness of Aircraft

Page

35

61

67
121
153
177
187
203
217
237
247

307
363
403
429

Chapter

17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

Operational Procedures

Special Operational Procedures and
Hazards (General Aspects)

Communications
Aircraft Accident and Incident
Facilitation

Security - Safeguarding International Civil Aviation
against Acts of Unlawful Interference

Human Performance and Limitations

Sampie Question Papers

Page

435

465
503
535
545

557
563
637

--- Page 7 ---

1

DEFINITIONS AND
ABBREVIATIONS

A

A Basic Instrument Flight Trainer. which is equipped with appropriate
instruments, and which simulates the flight deck environment of an aircraft in flight
in instrument flight conditions.

A Flight Procedures Trainer. which provides a realistic flight deck
environment, and which simulates instrument responses, simple control functions of
mechanical, electrical, electronic, etc. aircraft systems, and the performance and flight
characteristics of aircraft of a particular class;

A Flight Simulator. which provides an accurate representation of the flight deck
of a particular aircraft type to the extent that the mechanical, electrical, electronic, etc.
aircraft systems control functions, the normal environment of flight crew members,
and the performance and flight characteristics of that type of aircraft are realistically
simulated;

Accelerate-Stop Distance Available (ASDA). The length of the take-off run
available plus the length of stop way, if provided.

Accepting Unit. Air traffic control unit next to take control of an aircraft.

Accident. An occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft which
takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention of
flight, until such time as all such persons have disembarked, in which:

a) aperson is fatally or seriously injured.
b) the aircraft sustains damage or structural failure.
c) the aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible.
(For details see chapter 21, Part I]
Advisory Airspace (ADA). An airspace of defined dimensions, or designated
route, within which air traffic advisory service is available.

Advisory Route (ADR). A designated route along which air traffic advisory
service is available.

AIR REGULATIONS

Aerial Work. means any aircraft operation undertaken for an industrial or
commercial purpose or any other remunerative purpose, but does not include operation
of an air transport service;

Aerodrome Beacon (ABN). Aeronautical beacon used to indicate the location
of an aerodrome from the air.

Aerodrome Control Service. Air traffic control service for aerodrome traffic.

Aerodrome Control Tower (TWR). A unit established to provide air traffic
control service to aerodrome traffic.

Aerodrome Elevation. The elevation of the highest point of the landing area.

Aerodrome Identification Sign. A sign placed on an aerodrome to aid in
identifying the aerodrome from the air.

Aerodrome operating minima. The limits of usability of an aerodrome for:

a) take-off, expressed in terms of runway visual range and/or visibility and, if
necessary, cloud conditions;

b) landing in 2D instrument approach operations, expressed in terms of
visibility and/or runway visual range, minimum descent altitude/height
(MDA/H) and, if necessary, cloud conditions; and

c) landing in 3D instrument approach operations, expressed in terms of
visibility and/or runway visual range and decision altitude/height (DA/H)
as appropriate to the type and/or category of the operation..

Aerodrome traffic zone(ATZ). An airspace of defined dimensions established
around an aerodrome for the protection of aerodrome traffic.

Aerodrome Traffic. All graffic on the maneuvering area of an aerodrome and
all aircraft flying in the vicinitysof an aerodrome.

;
Note: — An aircraft is in the vicinity of an aerodrome when it is in, entering or leaving
an aerodrome traffic circuit.

Aerodrome(AD). A defined area on land or water (including any buildings,
installations and equipment) intended to be used either wholly or in part for the
arrival, departure and surface movement of aircraft.

Aerodyne. means an aircraft whose support in flight is derived dynamically
from the reaction on surfaces in motion relative to the air, and includes all aeroplanes,
helicopters, gyroplanes, gliders and kites;

Aeronautical Fixed Service (AFS). A telecommunication service between
specified fixed points provided primarily for the safety of air navigation and for the
regular, efficient and economical operation of air services.

Aeronautical Ground Light. Any light specially provided as an aid to air
navigation, other than a light displayed on an aircraft.

--- Page 8 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Aeronautical Information Circular (AIC). A notice containing information
that does not qualify for the origination of a NOTAM or for inclusion in the AIP, but
which relates to flight safety, air navigation, technical, administrative or legislative
matters.

Aeronautical Information Publication (AIP). A publication issued by or
with the authority of a State and containing aeronautical information of a lasting
character essential to air navigation.

Aeronautical Information Service (AIS). A service establishedWithin the
defined area of coverage, responsible for the provision of aeronautical information/data
necessary for the safety, regularity and efficiency of air navigation.

Aeronautical Information. Information resulting from the assembly, analysis
and formatting of aeronautical data.

Aeronautical Mobile Service (AMS). A mobile service between aeronautical
stations and aircraft stations, or between aircraft stations, in which survival craft
stations may participate; emergency position-indicating radio beacon stations may
also participate in this service on designated distress and emergency frequencies.

Aeronautical Station. A land station in the aeronautical mobile service. In
certain instances, an aeronautical station may be located, for example, on board ship
or on a platform at sea.

Aeronautical Telecommunication Station. A station in the aeronautical
telecommunication service.

Aeroplane Reference Field Length. The minimum field length required
for take-off at maximum certificated take-off mass, sea level, standard atmospheric
conditions, still air and zero runway slope, as shown in the appropriate aeroplane
flight manual prescribed by the certificating authority or equivalent data from the
aeroplane manufacturer. Field length means balanced field length for aeroplanes, if
applicable, or take-off distance in other cases.

Note: — Attachment A, Section 2 provides information on the concept of balanced field
length and the ICAO Airworthiness Manual (Doc 9760) contains detailed guidance on
matters related to take-off distance.

Aeroplane. A power-driven heavier-than-air aircraft, deriving its lift in flight
chiefly from aerodynamic reactions on surfaces which remain fixed under given
conditions of flight.

Air Defence Identification Zone (ADIZ). Special designated airspace of
defined dimensions within aircraft are required to comply with special identification
and/or reporting procedures additional to those related to the provision of air traffic
services (ATS).

Air Operator Permit/ Certificate (AOP/AOC). A Permit /Certificate
authorizing an operator to carry out specified commercial air transport operations.

AIR REGULATIONS

Air Traffic Advisory Service. A service provided within advisory airspace to
ensure separation, in so far as practical, between aircraft which are operating on IFR

flight plans.

Air Traffic Control Clearance. Authorization for an aircraft to proceed under
conditions specified by an air traffic control unit.

Note 1: — For convenience, the term “air traffic control clearance” is frequently
abbreviated to “clearance” when used in appropriate contexts.

99 66,

Note 2: — The abbreviated term “clearance” may be prefixed by the words “taxi”, “take-
off’, “departure”, “en route”, “approach” or “landing” to indicate the particular portion
of flight to which the air traffic control clearance relates.

Air Traffic Control Service. A service provided for the purpose of:

a) preventing collisions:

1) between aircraft, and

2) onthe maneuvering area between aircraft and obstructions; and
b) expediting and maintaining an orderly flow of air traffic.

Air Traffic Control Unit (ATCU). A generic term meaning variously, area
control centre, approach control unit or aerodrome control tower.

Air Traffic Flow Management (ATFM). A service established with the
objective of contributing to a safe, orderly and expeditious flow of air traffic by ensuring
that ATC capacity is utilized to the maximum extent possible and that the traffic
volume is compatible with the capacities declared by the appropriate ATS authority.

Air Traffic Service (ATS). A generic term meaning variously, flight information
service, alerting service, air traffic advisory service, air traffic control service (area
control service, approach control service or aerodrome control service).

Air Traffic Services Airspaces. Airspaces of defined dimensions, alphabetically
designated, within which specific types of flights may operate and for which air traffic
services and rules of operation are specified.

Air Traffic Services Reporting Office (ARO). A unit established for the
purpose of receiving reports concerning air traffic services and flight plans submitted
before departure.

Note: —.n air traffic services reporting office may be established as a separate unit or
combined with an existing unit, such as another air traffic services unit, or a unit of the
aeronautical information service.

Air Traffic Services Unit (ATSU). A generic term meaning variously, air
traffic control unit, flight information centre or air traffic services reporting office.

Air Traffic. All aircraft in flight or operating on the manoeuvring area of an
aerodrome.

--- Page 9 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Air Transport Service. means a service for the transport by air of persons, mails
or any other thing, animate or inanimate, for any kind of remuneration whatsoever,
whether such service consists of a single flight or series of flights;

Air Transport Undertaking. means an undertaking whose business includes
the carriage by air of passengers or cargo for hire or reward;

AIRAC. An acronym (aeronautical information regulation and control)
signifying a system aimed at advance notification based on common effective dates, of
circumstances that necessitate significant changes in operating practices.

Airborne Collision Avoidance System (ACAS). An aircraft system based on
secondary surveillance radar (SSR) transponder signals which operates independently
of ground-based equipment to provide advice to the pilot on potential conflicting
aircraft that are equipped with SSR transponders.

Aircraft Classification Number (ACN). A number expressing the relative
effect of an aircraft on a pavement for a specified standard sub grade category.

Note: — The aircraft classification number is calculated with respect to the center of
gravity (CG) position which yields the critical loading on the critical gear. Normally the
aft most CG position appropriate to the maximum gross apron (ramp) mass is used to
calculate the ACN. In exceptional cases, the forward most CG position may result in the
nose gear loading being more critical.

Aircraft Operating Manual. A manual, acceptable to the DGCA containing
normal, abnormal and emergency procedures, checklists, limitations, performance
information, details of the aircraft systems and other material relevant to the operation
of the aircraft.

Note: — The aircraft operating manual is the part of the operation manual.

Aircraft Stand. A designated area on an apron intended to be used for parking
an aircraft.

Aircraft (ACFT). Any machine which can derive support in the atmosphere
from the reactions of the air other than reactions of the air against the earth’s surface
and includes balloons whether fixed or free, airships, kites, gliders and flying machines.

Air-Ground Communication. Two-way communication between aircraft and
stations or locations on the surface of the earth.

Air-Ground Control Radio Station. An aeronautical telecommunication
station having primary responsibility for handling communications pertaining to the
operation and control of aircraft in a given area.

AIRMET Information. Information issued by a meteorological watch office
concerning the occurrence or expected occurrence of specified en-route weather
phenomena which may affect the safety of low-level aircraft operations and which was
not already included in the forecast issued for low level flights in the flight information
region concerned or sub-area thereof.

AIR REGULATIONS

Note 1:— For convenience, the term “air traffic control clearance” is frequently
abbreviated to “clearance” when used in appropriate contexts.

Note 2:— The abbreviated term “clearance” may be prefixed by the words “taxi”, “take-
off”, “departure”, “en route”, “approach” or “landing” to indicate the particular portion
of flight to which the air traffic control clearance relates.

Airship. means a power-driven lighter-than air aircraft;

Air-taxiing. Movement of a helicopter/VTOL above the surface of an aerodrome,
normally in ground effect and at a ground speed normally less than 37 km/h (20 kt).

Airway (AWY). A control area or portion thereof established in the form of a
corridor.

Airworthy. The status of an aircraft, engine, propeller or part when it conforms
to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation.

AIS Product. Aeronautical information provided in the form of the elements of
the Integrated Aeronautical Information Package (except NOTAM and PIB), including
aeronautical charts, or in the form of suitable electronic media.

ALERFA. The code word used to designate an alert phase.

Alert Phase. (ALERFA) A situation wherein apprehension exists as to the
safety of an aircraft and its occupants.

Alerting Post. Any facility intended to serve as an intermediary between a
person reporting an emergency and a rescue coordination centre or rescue sub centre.

Alerting Service (ALRS). A service provided to notify appropriate organizations
regarding aircraft in need of search and rescue aid, and assist such organizations as
required.

Alternate Aerodrome (ALTN). An aerodrome to which an aircraft may

proceed when it becomes either impossible or inadvisable to proceed to or to land at
the aerodrome of intended landing. Alternate aerodromes include the following:

Altimetry System Error (ASE). The difference between the altitude indicated
by the altimeter display, assuming a correct altimeter barometric setting, and the
pressure altitude corresponding to the undisturbed ambient pressure.

Al‘itude (ALT). The vertical distance of a level, a point or an object considered
as a point, measured from mean sea level (MSL).

Altitude (ALT). The vertical distance of a level, a point or an object considered
as a point, measured from mean sea level (MSL).

Amphibian. means an aeroplane capable normally of taking off from and
alighting on either land or a solid platform or water;

Application. Manipulation and processing of data in support of user
requirements (ISO 19104*).

--- Page 10 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Approach procedure with vertical guidance (APV). A performance-
based navigation (PBN) instrument approach procedure designed for 3D instrument
approach operations Type A.

Approach Control Service (App). Air traffic control service for arriving or
departing controlled flights.

Approach Control Unit. A unit established to provide air traffic control service
to controlled flights arriving at, or departing from, one or more aerodromes.

Appropriate ATS Authority. The relevant authority designated by the State
responsible for providing air traffic services in the airspace concerned.

Appropriate Authority.

a) Regarding flight over the high seas: The relevant authority of the State of
Registry.

b) Regardingflightotherthanoverthehighseas:TherelevantauthorityoftheState
having sovereignty over the territory being over flown.

Apron Management Service. A service provided to regulate the activities and
the movement of aircraft and vehicles on an apron.

Apron (APN). A defined area, on a land aerodrome, intended to accommodate
aircraft for purposes of loading or unloading passengers, mail or cargo, fuelling, parking
or maintenance.

Area Control Centre (ACC). A unit established to provide air traffic control
service to controlled flights in control areas under its jurisdiction.

Area Control Service. Air traffic control service for controlled flights in control
areas.

Area Navigation (RNAV) Specification. A navigation specification based on
area navigation that does not include the requirement for performance monitoring and
alerting, designated by the prefix RNAV, e.g. RNAV 5, RNAV 1.

The term RNP as previously defined as “a statement of the navigation
performance, necessary for operation within a defined airspace”, has been removed
from this Annex as the concept of RNP has been overtaken by the concept of PBN.
The term RNP in this Annex is now solely used in context of navigation specifications
that require performance monitoring and alerting. E.g. RNP 4 refers to the aircraft
and operating requirements, including a 4 NM lateral performance with on board
performance monitoring and alerting that are detailed in the PBN Manual (Doc 9613).

Area Navigation (RNAV). A method of navigation which permits aircraft
operation on any desired flight path within the coverage of ground or space-based
navigation aids or within the limits of the capability of self contained aids, or a
combination of these.

Note: —- Area navigation includes performance based navigation as well as other
operations that do not meet the definition of performance based navigation.

7

AIR REGULATIONS

Area Navigation Route. An ATS route established for the use of aircraft
capable of employing area navigation.

ATS Route. A specified route designed for channeling the flow of traffic as
necessary for the provision of air traffic services.

Note 1: — The term “ATS route” is used to mean variously, airway, advisory route,
controlled or uncontrolled route arrival or departure route, etc.

Note 2: — An ATS route is defined by route specifications which include an ATS route
designator, the track to or from significant points (way-points), distance between
significant points, reporting requirements and, as determined by the appropriate ATS
authority, the lowest safe altitude.

ATS Surveillance System. A generic term meaning variously, ADS-B, PSR,SSR
or any comparable ground-based system that enables the identification of aircraft. A
comparable ground-based system is one that has been demonstrated, by comparative
assessment or other methodology, to have a level of safety and performance equal to or
better than monopulse SSR.

Automatic Fixed ELT (ELT(AF)). An automatically activated ELT which is
permanently attached to an aircraft.

Automatic Dependent Surveillance — Broadcast (ADS-B). A means by
which aircraft, aerodrome vehicles and other objects can automatically transmit and/
or receive data such as identification, position and additional data, as appropriate, in
a broadcast mode via a data link.

Automatic Dependent Surveillance — Contract (ADS-C). A means by
which the terms of an ADS-C agreement will be exchanged between the ground system
and the aircraft, via a data link, specifying under what conditions ADS-C reports would
be initiated, and what data would be contained in the reports.

Note: — The abbreviated term “ADS contract” is commonly used to refer to ADS event
contract, ADS demand contract, ADS periodic contract or an emergency mode.

Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS). A surveillance technique in which
aircraft automatically provide, via a data link, data derived from onboard navigation
and position-fixing systems, including aircraft identification, four-dimensional position
and additional data as appropriate.

Automatic Deployable ELT (ELT(AD)). An ELT which is rigidly attached to

an aircraft and which is automatically deployed and activated by impact, and, in some
cases, also by hydrostatic sensors. Manual deployment is also provided

Automatic Portable ELT (ELT(AP)). An automatically activated ELT which
is rigidly attached to an aircraft but readily removable from the aircraft.

Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS). The automatic provision
of current, routine information to arriving and departing aircraft throughout 24 hours
or a specified portion thereof.

--- Page 11 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

B

; Barrette. Three or more aeronautical ground lights closely spaced in a transverse
line so that from a distance they appear as a short bar of light.

Base Turn. A turn executed by the aircraft during the initial approach between
the end of the outbound track and the beginning of the intermediate or final approach
track. The tracks are not reciprocal. .

Note:— Base turns may be designated as being made either in level flight or while -

descending, according to the circumstances of each individual procedure.

C

Cabin Crew Member. A crew member who performs, in the interest of safety
of passengers, duties assigned by the operator or the pilot-in-command of the aircraft,
but who shall not act as a flight crew member

Ceiling. The height above the ground or water of the base of the lowest layer of
cloud below 6,000 metres (20,000 feet) covering more than half the sky.

Certificate of Airworthiness. means a certificate issued under these rules;

Change-Over Point (COP). The point at which an aircraft navigating on an
ATS route segment defined by reference to very high frequency omni-directional radio
ranges is expected to transfer its primary navigational reference from the facility
behind the aircraft to the next facility ahead of the aircraft.

Note: — Change-over points are established to provide the optimum balance in respect
of signal strength and quality between facilities at all levels to be used and to ensure a
common source of azimuth guidance for all aircraft operating along the same portion
of a route segment.

Circling Approach. An extension of an instrument approach procedure which
provides for visual circling of the aerodrome prior to landing.

Class Rating. shall comprise (a) Single-engine, land; (b) Single-engine, sea; (c)
Multi-engine, land; (d) Multi-engine, sea;
Clearance Limit. The point to which an aircraft is granted an air traffic control
clearance.

Clearway. A defined rectangular area on the ground or water under the control
of the appropriate authority, selected or prepared as a suitable area over which an
aeroplane may make a portion of its initial climb to a specified height.

Commercial Air Transport Operation. An aircraft operation involving the
transport of passengers, cargo or mail for remuneration or hire.

AIR REGULATIONS

Continuous descent final approach (CDFA). A technique consistent with
stabilized approach procedures, for flying the final approach segment of a non-
precision instrument approach procedure as a continuous descent, without level-off,
from an altitude/height at or above the final approach fix altitude/height to a point
approximately 15 m (50 ft) above the landing runway threshold or the point where the
flare manoeuvre should begin for the type of aircraft flown.

Contracting State. means any State which is for the time being a party to the
Convention on International Civil Aviation concluded at Chicago on December 7, 1944,
and any amendment which may be made thereto under the provisions of Article 94

thereof;

Control Area (CTA). A controlled airspace extending upwards from a specified
limit above the earth.

Control zone (CTR). A controlled airspace extending upwards from the surface
of the earth to a specified upper limit.

Controlled Aerodrome. An aerodrome at which air traffic control service is
provided to aerodrome traffic.
Note:— The term “controlled aerodrome” indicates that air traffic control service is
provided to aerodrome traffic but does not necessarily imply that a control zone exists.

Controlled Airspace. An airspace of defined dimensions within which air
traffic control service is provided in accordance with the airspace classification.
Note:— Controlled airspace is a generic term which covers ATS airspace Classes A, B,
C, Dand E as described in Annex 11, 2.6.

Controlled Flight. Any flight which is subject to an air traffic control clearance.

Controller-Pilot Data Link Communications (CPDLC). A means of
communication between controller and pilot, using data link for ATC communications.

Convention. means the Convention relating to International Civil Aviation
signed at Chicago on the 7th day of December, 1944, as amended from time to time;

Co-pilot. means a licensed pilot serving in any piloting capacity other than as
pilot-in-command but excluding a pilot who is on board the aircraft for the sole purpose
of receiving flight instruction;

Course. or “heading” means the direction in which the longitudinal axis of
an aircraft is pointed, usually expressed in degrees from North (True, Magnetic or
Compass);

Crew Member. A person assigned by an operator to duty on an aircraft during
a flight duty period.

Cruise Climb. An aeroplane cruising technique resulting in a net increase in
altitude as the aeroplane mass decreases.

10

--- Page 12 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Cruise Relief Pilot. A flight crew member who is assigned to perform pilot
tasks during cruise flight, to allow the pilot-in-command or a co-pilot to obtain planned
rest.

Cruising Level. A level maintained during a significant portion of a flight.

Current Flight Plan. The flight plan, including changes, if any, brought about
by consequent clearances.

D

Danger Area (D...). An airspace of defined dimensions within which activities
dangerous to the flight of aircraft may exist at specified times.

Dangerous Goods. Articles or substances which are capable of posing a
risk to health, safety, property or the environment and which are shown in the list
of dangerous goods in the Technical Instructions or which are classified according to
those Instructions.

Note: — Dangerous goods are classified in Aircraft (Carriage of Dangerous Goods
Rules, 2003).

Data Link Communications. A form of communication intended for the
exchange of messages via a data link.

Data Link-Automatic Terminal Information Service (D ATIS). The
provision of ATIS via data link.

Data link-VOLMET (D-VOLMET). Provision of current aerodrome routine
meteorological reports (METAR) and aerodrome special meteorological reports
(SPECT), aerodrome forecasts (TAF), SIGMET, special air-reports not covered by a
SIGMET and, where available, AIRMET via data link.

Dead Reckoning (DR) Navigation. The estimating or determining of position
by advancing an earlier known position by the application of direction, time and speed
data.

Decision Altitude (DA) or Decision height (DH). A specified altitude or
height in a 3D instrument approach operation at which a missed approach must
be initiated if the required visual reference to continue the approach has not been
established.

Note 1: — Decision altitude (DA) is referenced to mean sea level and decision height
(DH) is referenced to the threshold elevation.

Note 2:— The required visual reference means that section of the visual aids or of the
approach area which should have been in view for sufficient time for the pilot to have
made an assessment of the aircraft position and rate of change of position, in relation
to the desired flight path. In Category III operations with a decision height the required
visual reference is that specified for the particular procedure and operation.

11

AIR REGULATIONS

Note 3: — For convenience where both expressions are used they may be written in the
form “decision altitude/height” and abbreviated “DA/H”.

Declared Distances.

a) Take-off run available (TORA). The length of runway declared available and
suitable for the ground run of an aeroplane taking off.

b) Take-off distance available (TODA). The length of the take-off run available
plus the length of the clearway, if provided.

c) Accelerate-stop distance available (ASDA). The length of the take-off run
available plus the length of the stop way, if provided.

d) Landing distance available (LDA). The length of runway, which is declared
available and suitable for, the ground run of an aeroplane landing.

De-icing/anti-icing Facility. A facility where frost, ice or snow is removed (de-
icing) from the aeroplane to provide clean surfaces, and/or where clean surfaces of
the aeroplane receive protection (anti-icing) against the formation of frost or ice and
accumulation of snow or slush for a limited period of time.

Note: — Further guidance is given in the ICAO Manual of Aircraft Ground De-icing/
Anti-icing Operations (Doc 9640).

Dependent Parallel Approaches. Simultaneous approaches to parallel or
near-parallel instrument runways where radar separation minima between aircraft
on adjacent extended runway centre lines are prescribed.

Descent Fix. A fix established in a precision approach at the FAP to eliminate
certain obstacles before the FAP, which would otherwise have to be considered for
obstacle clearance purposes.

Destination Alternate. An alternate aerodrome to which an aircraft may
proceed should it become either impossible or inadvisable to land at the aerodrome of
intended landing.

Note:— The aerodrome from which a flight departs may also be an en-route or a
destination alternate aerodrome for that flight.

DETRESFA. The code word used to designate a distress phase.

Direct Transit Arrangements. Special arrangements approved by the public
authorities concerned by which traffic which is pausing briefly in its passage through
the Contracting State may remain under their direct control.

Director-General. means Director-General of Civil Aviation;
Displaced Threshold. A threshold not located at the extremity of a runway.

Distress Phase. A situation wherein there is reasonable certainty that an
aircraft and its occupants are threatened by grave and imminent danger or require
immediate assistance.

Ditching. The forced landing of an aircraft on water.

12

--- Page 13 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

DME Distance. The line of sight distance (slant range) from the source of a
DME signal to the receiving antenna.

Downstream Clearance. A clearance issued to an aircraft by an air traffic
control unit that is not the current controlling authority of that aircraft.

Dual Flight Time. means flight time during which a person is receiving flight
instructions from a pilot on board the aircraft;

E

EDTO critical fuel. The fuel quantity necessary to fly to an en-route alternate
aerodrome considering, at the most critical point on the route, the most limiting system
failure.

Elevation (ELAV). The vertical distance of a point or a level, on or affixed to
the surface of the earth, measured from mean sea level.

Ellipsoid Height (Geodetic Height). The height related to the reference
ellipsoid, measured along the ellipsoidal outer normal through the point in question.

Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT). A generic term describing equipment
which broadcast distinctive signals on designated frequencies and, depending on
application, may be automatically activated by impact or be manually activated. An
ELT may be any of the following:

Emergency Phase. A generic term meaning, as the case may be, uncertainty
phase, alert phase or distress phase.

Engine. A unit used or intended to be used for aircraft propulsion. It consists of
at least those components and equipment necessary for functioning and control, but
excludes the propeller/rotors (if applicable).

Enhanced vision system (EVS). A system to display electronic real-time
images of the external scene achieved through the use of image sensors.

Note.— EVS does not include night vision imaging systems (NVIS).

En-route Alternate. An alternate aerodrome at which an aircraft would be
able to land after experiencing an abnormal or emergency condition while en-route.

En-route Alternate. An aerodrome at which an aircraft would be able to land
fter experiencing an abnormal or emergency condition while en route.

Estimated Off-Block Time (EOBT). The estimated time at which the aircraft
will commence movement associated with departure.

Estimated Time of Arrival (ETA). For IFR flights, the time at which it is
estimated that the aircraft will arrive over that designated point, defined by reference
to navigation aids, from which it is intended that an instrument approach procedure
will be commenced, or, if no navigation aid is associated with the aerodrome, the time

13

AIR REGULATIONS

at which the aircraft will arrive over the aerodrome. For VFR flights, the time at which
it is estimated that the aircraft will arrive over the aerodrome.

ETOPS en-route Alternate. A suitable and appropriate alternate aerodrome
at which an aeroplane would be able to land after experiencing an engine shut-down
or other abnormal or emergency condition while en route in an ETOPS operation.

Expected Approach Time (EAT). The time at which ATC expects that an
arriving aircraft, following a delay, will leave the holding fix to complete its approach
for a landing.

Note: — The actual time of leaving the holding fix will depend upon the approach
clearance.

Export. means taking out of India;

Extended Range Operations with Twin Engined Aeroplane (ETOPS).
Any flight by aeroplane with two turbine power engines where from any point on
the route the flight time at the one engine inoperative cruise speed to an adequate
aerodrome is greater than the threshold time.

E

Filed Flight Plan. The flight plan as filed with an ATS unit by the pilot or a
designated representative, without any subsequent changes.

Final Approach (FNA). That part of an instrument approach procedure which
commences at the specified final approach fix or point, or where such a fix or point is
not specified, a) at the end of the last procedure turn, base turn or inbound turn of
a racetrack procedure, if specified; or b) at the point of interception of the last track
specified in the approach procedure; and ends at a point in the vicinity of an aerodrome
from which:

1) alanding can be made; or
2) amissed approach procedure is initiated.

Final Approach and take-off Area (FATO). A defined area over which the
final phase of the approach manoeuvre to hover or landing is completed and from which
the take-off manoeuvre is commenced. Where the FATO is to be used by performance
Class 1 helicopters, the defined area includes the rejected take-off area available.

Final Approach Segment (FAS). That segment of an instrument approach
procedure in which alignment and descent for landing are accomplished.

Flight Crew Member. A licensed crew member charged with duties essential
to the operation of an aircraft during a flight duty period.

Flight Information Centre (FIC). A unit established to provide flight
information service and alerting service.

14

--- Page 14 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Flight Information Region (FIR). An airspace of defined dimensions within
which flight information service and alerting service are provided.

Flight Information Service (FIS). A service provided for the purpose of giving
advice and information useful for the safe and efficient conduct of flights.

Flight Level (FL). A surface of constant atmospheric pressure which is related
to a specific pressure datum, 1013.2 hectopascals (hPa), and is separated from other
such surfaces by specific pressure intervals.

Note 1; — A pressure type altimeter calibrated in accordance with the Standard
Atmosphere: ,

a) when set toa QNH altimeter setting, will indicate altitude;

b) when set to a QFE altimeter setting, will indicate height above the QFE
reference datum; c) when set to a pressure of 1013.2 hPa, may be used to
indicate flight levels.

Note 2: — The terms “height” and “altitude”, used in Note 1 above, indicate altimetric
rather than geometric heights and altitudes.

Flight Manual. A manual, associated with the certificate of airworthiness,
containing limitations within which the aircraft is to be considered airworthy, and
instructions and information necessary to the flight crew members for the safe
operation of the aircraft.

Flight Operations Officer/Flight Dispatcher. A person designated by the
operator to engage in the control and supervision of flight operations, whether licensed
or not, suitably qualified in accordance with CAR Section 7, Series ‘M’ Part II, who
supports, briefs and/or assists the pilot-in-command in the safe conduct of the flight.

Flight Plan (PLN). Specified information provided to air traffic services units,
relative to an intended flight or portion of a flight of an aircraft.

Flight Recorder. Any type of recorder installed in the aircraft for the purpose
of complementing accident/incident investigation.

Note: — See Annex 6, Parts I, IT and IIT, for specifications relating to flight recorders.

Flight Simulation Training Device. Any one of the following three types of
apparatus in which flight conditions are simulated on the ground:

Flight Time in a Glider. means the total time occupied in flight, whether being
towed or not, from the moment the glider first moves for the purpose of taking off until
the movement it comes to rest at the end of the flight;

Flight Time in Free Flight. includes flight time in glider when it is not being
towed;

15

AIR REGULATIONS

Flight Time. —

(i) in respect of an aeroplane, means the total time from the moment the
aeroplane first moves for the purpose of taking off until the moment it
finally comes to rest at the end of the flight; and

Gi) in respect of a helicopter, means the total time from the moment the
helicopter’s rotor blades start turning until the moment it finally comes to
rest at the end of the flight, and the rotor blades are stopped.

Note: — Flight time as herein defined is synonymous with the term “block to block” time,
or “chock to chock” time in general usage which is measured from the time an aeroplane
first moves for the purpose of taking off until it finally stops at the end of the flight;

Flight Visibility. The visibility forward from the cockpit of an aircraft in flight.

Forecast (FCST). A statement of expected meteorological conditions for a
specified time or period, and for a specified area or portion of airspace.

Foreign Aircraft. means an aircraft registered in a country other than India;

Frangible Object. An object of low mass designed to break, distort or yield on
impact so as to present the minimum hazard to aircraft.

G

General Aviation Operation. An aircraft operation other than a commercial
air transport operation or an aerial work operation.

Geoid Undulation (GUND). The distance of the geoid above (positive) or
below (negative) the mathematical reference ellipsoid.

In respect to the World Geodetic System — 1984 (WGS-84) defined ellipsoid, the
difference between the WGS-84 ellipsoidal height and orthometric height represents
WGS 84 geoid undulation.

Geoid. The equipotential surface in the gravity field of the Earth which coincides
with the undisturbed mean sea level (MSL) extended continuously through the
continents. The geoid is irregular in shape because of local gravitational disturbances
(wind tides, salinity, current, etc.) and the direction of gravity is perpendicular to the
geoid at every point.

Glider. means a non-power-driven heavier-than-air aircraft, deriving its lift in
flight chiefly from aerodynamic reactions on surfaces which remain fixed under given
conditions of flight;

Government Aerodrome. means an aerodrome which is maintained by or
on behalf of the Central Government and includes an airport to which the Airports
Authority of India Act, 1994 (55 of 1994) applies or is made applicable;

Ground Handling. Services necessary for an aircraft’s arrival at, and departure
from, an airport, other than air traffic services.

16

--- Page 15 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Ground Visibility. The visibility at an aerodrome, as reported by an accredited
observer or by automatic system.

H

Hazard Beacon (HBN). An aeronautical beacon used to designate a danger to
air navigation.

Heading (HDG). The direction in which the longitudinal axis of an aircraft is
pointed, usually expressed in degrees from North (true, magnetic, compass or grid).

Head-up Display (HUD). A display system that presents flight information
into the pilot’s forward external field of view.

Height (HGT). The vertical distance of a level, a point or an object considered
as a point, measured from a specified datum.

Helicopter. means a heavier-than -air aircraft supported in flight by the
reactions of the air on one or more power driven rotors on substantially vertical axis;

Heliport. An aerodrome or a defined area on a structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the arrival, departure and surface movement of helicopters.

Holding Bay. A defined area where aircraft can be held, or bypassed, to facilitate
efficient surface movement of aircraft.

Holding Procedure. A predetermined maneuver which keeps an aircraft
within a specified airspace while awaiting further clearance.

Holdover Time. The estimated time the anti-icing fluid (treatment) will prevent
the formation of ice and frost and the accumulation of snow on the protected (treated)
surfaces of an aeroplane.

I

Identification Beacon (IBN). An aeronautical beacon emitting a coded signal
by means of which a particular point of reference can be identified.

IFR Flight. A flight conducted in accordance with the instrument flight rules.
INCERFA. The code word used to designate an uncertainty phase.

Incident. An occurrence, other than an accident, associated with the operation
of an aircraft which affects or could affect the safety of operation.

Initial Approach fix (IAF). A fix that marks the beginning of the initial
segment and the end of the arrival segment, if applicable. In RNAV applications this
fix is normally defined by a fly-by waypoint.

17

AIR REGULATIONS

Initial Approach Segment. That segment of an instrument apy ‘ oach procedure
between the initial approach fix and the intermediate fix or, where applicable, the final
approach fix or point.

Instrument Approach Procedure (IAP). A series of predetermined
manoeuvres by reference to flight instruments with specified protection from obstacles
from the initial approach fix, or where applicable, from the beginning of a defined
arrival route to a point from which a landing can be completed and thereafter, if a
landing is not completed, to a position at which holding or en-route obstacle clearance
criteria apply. Instrument approach procedures are classified as follows:

Non-precision approach (NPA) procedure. An instrument approach
procedure designed for 2D instrument approach operations Type A
(Instrument approach operation 250’ or above).

Approach procedure with vertical guidance (APV). A performance-
based navigation (PBN) instrument approach procedure designed for 3D
instrument approach operations Type A.

Precision approach (PA) procedure. An instrument approach procedure
based on navigation systems (ILS, MLS, GLS and SBAS Cat I) designed for
3D instrument approach operations Type A or B (A-Instrument approach
operation 250’ or above or B- below 250’).

Note: — Lateral and vertical guidance refers to the guidance provided either by:
a) a ground-based navigation aid; or b) computer-generated navigation data.

Instrument Flight Time. means the time during which a pilot is piloting an
aircraft solely by reference to instruments and without external reference points;

Instrument Ground Time. means the time during which a pilot is practising,
on the ground, simulated instrument flight on a mechanical device approved by the
Director -General;

Instrument Meteorological Conditions (IMC). Meteorological conditions
expressed in terms of visibility, distance from cloud, and ceiling, less than the minima
specified for visual meteorological conditions.

Note: — The specified minima for visual meteorological conditions are contained in
Annex 2.

Instrument Runway. One of the following types of runways intended for the
operation of aircraft using instrument approach procedures:

a) Non-precision approach runway. A runway served by visual aids and non-
visual aid(s) intended for landing operations following an instrument
approach operation type A (Instrument approach operation 250’ or above)
and a visibility not less than 1000 m.

18

--- Page 16 ---

®

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

b) Precision approach runway, category I. A runway served by visual aids and
non-visual aid(s) intended for landing operations following an instrument
approach operation type B (Instrument approach operation below 250’) with
a decision height (DH) not lower than 60-m (200 ft) and either a visibility
not less than 800 m or a runway visual range not less than 550 m.

c) Precision approach runway, category II. A runway served by visual aids and
non-visual aid(s) intended for landing operations following an instrument
approach operation type B with a decision height (DH) lower than 60 m
(200 ft) but not lower than 30 m (100 ft) and a runway visual range not less
than 300 m.

d) Precision approach runway, category II. A runway served by visual aids and
non-visual aid(s) intended for landing operations following an instrument
approach operation type B to and along the surface of the runway and:

A- intended for operations with a decision height (DH) lower than 30 m
(100 ft), or no decision height and a runway visual range not less than
175 m.
B-— intended for operations with a decision height (DH) lower than 15 m
(50 ft), or no decision height and a runway visual range less than 175 m
but not less than 50 m.
C— intended for operations with no decision height (DH) and no runway
visual range limitations.
Note 1. — Visual aids need not necessarily be matched to the scale of non-visual aids
provided. The criterion for the selection of visual aids is the conditions in which
operations are intended to be conducted.

Note 2. - Refer to Annex 6 for instrument approach operation types.

Instrument Time. means the instrument flight time or the instrument ground
time.

Intermediate Approach Segment. That segment of an instrument approach
procedure between either the intermediate fix and the final approach fix or point, or
between the end of a reversal, racetrack or dead reckoning track procedure and the
final approach fix or point, as appropriate.

Intermediate Fix (IF). A fix that marks the end of an initial segment and
the beginning of the intermediate segment. In RNAV applications this fix is normally
defined by a fly-by waypoint.

Intermediate Holding Position. A designated position intended for traffic
control at which taxiing aircraft and vehicles shall stop and hold until further cleared
to proceed, when so instructed by the aerodrome control tower.

International Airport. Any airport designated by the Contracting State in
whose territory it is situated as an airport of entry and departure for international air
traffic, where the formalities incident to customs, immigration, public health, animal
and plant quarantine and similar procedures are carried out.

19

AIR REGULATIONS

International NOTAM office (NOF). An office designated by a State for the
exchange of NOTAM internationally.

L

Landing Area. That part of a movement area intended for the landing or takeoff
of aircraft.

Landing Direction Indicator (LDI). A device to indicate visually the direction
currently designated for landing and for take-off.

Landing Distance Available (LDA). The length of runway which is declared
available and suitable for the ground run of an aeroplane landing.

Large Aeroplane. An aeroplane of a maximum certificated take-off mass of
over 5700kg.

Level (LVL). A generic term relating to the vertical position of an aircraft in
flight and meaning variously, height, altitude or flight level.

M

Maintenance. The performance of tasks required to ensure the continuing
airworthiness of an aircraft, including any one or combination of overhaul, inspection,
replacement, defect rectification and the embodiment of a modification or repair or

test;

Major Airport. Shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (i) of section 2
of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 (27 of 2008);

Making Way. An aircraft is said to be “making way” when under way in the air
or on the surface of the water, it has a velocity relative to the air or water, respectively;

Manoeuvring Area. That part of an aerodrome to be used for the take-off,
landing and taxiing of aircraft, excluding aprons.

Marker. An object displayed above ground level in order to indicate an obstacle
or delincate a boundary.

Marking. A symbol or group of symbols displayed on the surface of the movement
area in order to convey aeronautical information.

Master Minimum Equipment List (MMEL). A list established for a particular
aircraft type by the organization responsible for the type design with the approval of the
State of Design containing items, one or more of which is permitted to be unserviceable
at the commencement of a flight. The MMEL may be associated with special operating
conditions, limitations or procedures.

20

--- Page 17 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Maximum Mass. Maximum certificated take-off mass.

Meteorological Office. An office designated to provide meteorological service
for international air navigation.

Microlight Aircraft (single seater). means a fixed wing aircraft with
maximum all up weight not exceeding 330 kg. and a wing area not less than 10 sq.
meters and which is designed to carry not more than one person;

Microlight Aircraft (two seater). means a fixed wing aircraft with a maximum
all up weight not exceeding 450 kg. and a wing area not less than 10 sq. meters and
which is designed to carry not more than two persons;

Microlight Aircraft. means Microlight aircraft (single seater) and Microlight
aircraft (two seater) and excludes hang gliders and para-planes.

Military Aircraft. includes naval, military and air force aircraft, and every
aircraft commanded by a person in naval, military or air force service detailed for the
purpose;

Minimum Descent Altitude (MDA) or Minimum Descent Height (MDH).
A specified altitude or height in a 2D instrument approach operation or circling
approach operation below which descent must not be made without the required visual
reference.

Note 1: — Minimum descent altitude (MDA) is referenced to mean sea level and
minimum descent height (MDH) is referenced to the aerodrome elevation or to the
threshold elevation if that is more than 2m (7 ft) below the aerodrome elevation. A
minimum descent height for a circling approach is referenced to the aerodrome elevation.

Note 2: — The required visual reference means that section of the visual aids or of the
approach area which should have been in view for sufficient time for the pilot to have
made an assessment of the aircraft position and rate of change of position, in relation to
the desired flight path. In the case of a circling approach the required visual reference
is the runway environment.

Note 3: — For convenience when both expressions are used they may be written in the
form “minimum descent altitude/height” and abbreviated “MDA/H”.

Minimum en-route Altitude (MEA). The altitude for an en-route segment that
provides adequate reception of relevant navigation facilities and ATS communications,
complies with the airspace structure and provides the required obstacle clearance.

Minimum Equipment List. (MEL). A list which provides for the operation
of aircraft, subject to specified conditions, with particular equipment inoperative,
prepared by an operator in conformity with, or more restrictive than, the MMEL
established for the aircraft type.

Minimum Obstacle Clearance Altitude (MOCA). The minimum altitude for
a defined segment of flight that provides the required obstacle clearance.

21

AIR REGULATIONS

Minimum Sector Altitude (MSA). The lowest altitude which may be used
which will provide a minimum clearance of 300 m (1 000 ft) above all objects located in
an area contained within a sector of a circle of 46 km (25 NM) radius centred on a radio
aid to navigation.

Minimum Stabilization Distance (MSD). The minimum distance to complete
a turn manoeuvre and after which a new manoeuvre can be initiated. The minimum
stabilization distance is used to compute the minimum distance between waypoints.

Missed Approach Holding Fix (MAHF). A fix used in RNAV applications that
marks the end of the missed approach segment and the centre point for the missed
approach holding.

Missed Approach Point (MAPt). That point in an instrument approach

procedure at or before which the prescribed missed approach procedure must be
initiated in order to ensure that the minimum obstacle clearance is not infringed.

Missed Approach Procedure. The procedure to be followed if the approach
cannot be continued.

Movement Area. That part of an aerodrome to be used for the take-off, landing
and taxiing of aircraft, consisting of the manoeuvring area and the apron(s).

N

Navigation specification. A set of aircraft and flight crew requirements
needed to support performance-based navigation operations within a defined airspace.
There are two kinds of navigation specifications:

Required navigation perforamnce (RNP) specification. A navigation
specification based on area navigation that includes the requirement for
performance monitoring and alerting, designated by the prefix RNP, e.g.
RNP 4, RNP APCH.

Area navigation (RNAV) specification. A navigation specification based
on area navigation that does not include the requirement for performance
monitoring and alerting, designated by the prefix RNAV, e.g. RNAV 5, RNAV
1.

Near-parallel Runways. Non-intersecting runways whose extended centre
lines have an angle of convergence/divergence of 15 degrees or less.

Night (NGT). Hours between the end of evening civil twilight and the beginning
of morning civil twilight or such other period between sunset and sunrise, as may be
prescribed by the appropriate authority. Civil twilight ends in the evening when the
centre of the sun’s disc is 6 degrees below the horizon and begins in the morning when
the centre of the sun’s disc is 6 degrees below the horizon.

Non-instrument Runway. A runway intended for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.

22

--- Page 18 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Non-precision approach (NPA) procedure. An instrument approach
procedure designed for 2D instrument approach operations Type A.

NOTAM. A notice to airmen distributed by means of telecommunication
containing information concerning the establishment, condition or change in any
aeronautical facility, service, procedure or hazard, the timely knowledge of which is
essential to personnel concerned with flight operations.

O

Obstacle (OBST). All fixed (whether temporary or permanent) and mobile
objects, or parts thereof, that: a) are located on an area intended for the surface
movement of aircraft or b) extend above a defined surface intended to protect aircraft
in flight; or c) stand outside those defined surfaces and that have been assessed as
being a hazard to air navigation.

Obstacle Assessment Surface (OAS). A defined surface intended for the
purpose of determining those obstacles to be considered in the calculation of obstacle
clearance altitude/height for a specific ILS facility and procedure.

Obstacle Clearance Altitude (OCA) or Obstacle Clearance Height (OCH).
The lowest altitude or the lowest height above the elevation of the relevant runway
threshold or the aerodrome elevation as applicable, used in establishing compliance
with appropriate obstacle clearance criteria.

Note 1: — Obstacle clearance altitude is referenced to mean sea level and obstacle
clearance height is referenced to the threshold elevation or in the case of non-precision
approach procedures to the aerodrome elevation or the threshold elevation if that is
more than 2 m (7 ft) below the aerodrome elevation. An obstacle clearance height for a
circling approach operation is referenced to the aerodrome elevation.

Note 2: — For convenience when both expressions are used they may be written in the
form “obstacle clearance altitude/height” and abbreviated “OCA/H”.

Obstacle Free Zone (OFZ). The airspace above the inner approach surface,
inner transitional surfaces, and balked landing surface and that portion of the strip
bounded by these surfaces, which is not penetrated by any fixed obstacle other than a
low-mass and frangibly mounted one required for air navigation purposes.

On the surface of the water. An aircraft is deemed to be “on the surface of the
water” so long as any portion of it is in contact with the water;

Operational Control. The exercise of authority over the initiation, continuation,
diversion or termination of a flight in the interest of the safety of the aircraft and the
regularity and efficiency of the flight.

23

AIR REGULATIONS

Operational Flight Plan. The operator’s plan for the safe conduct of the
flight based on considerations of aeroplane performance, other operating limitations
and relevant expected conditions on the route to be followed and at the aerodromes
concerned.

Operations Manual. A manual containing procedures, instructions and
guidance for use by operational personnel in the execution of their duties.

Operations Specifications. The authorizations, conditions and limitations
associated with the air operator certificate and subject to the conditions in the
operations manual.

Operator (OPS). A person, organization or enterprise engaged in or offering to
engage in an aircraft operation.

P

Passenger Aircraft., “mail aircraft” and “goods aircraft” means aircraft which
effect public transport of passengers, mails or goods, respectively;

Pavement Classification Number (PCN). A number expressing the bearing
strength of a pavement for unrestricted operations.

Performance-based communication (PBC). Communication based on
performance specifications applied to the provision of air traffic services.

Note. — An RCP specification includes communication performance requirements that
are allocated to system components in terms of the communication to be provided and
associated transaction time, continuity, availability, integrity, safety and functionality
needed for the proposed operation in the context of a particular airspace concept.

Performance -based navigation (PBN). Area navigation based on
performance requirements for aircraft operating along an ATS route, on an instrument
approach procedure or in a designated airspace.

Note.— Performance requirements are expressed in navigation specifications (RNAV
specification, RNP specification) in terms of accuracy, integrity, continuity, availability
and functionality needed for the proposed operation in the context of a particular
airspace concept.

Performance-based surveillance (PBS). Surveillance based on performance
specifications applied to the provision of air traffic services.

Note.— An RSP specification includes surveillance performance requirements that are
allocated to system components in terms of the surveillance to be provided and associated
data delivery time, continuity, availability, integrity, accuracy of the surveillance data,
safety and functionality needed for the proposed operation in the context of a particular
airspace concept.

24

--- Page 19 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Performance class 1 helicopter. A helicopter with performance such that,
in case of critical power- unit failure, it is able to land on the rejected take-off area
or safely continue the flight to an appropriate landing area depending on when the
failure occurs.

Performance class 2 helicopter. A helicopter with performance such that, in
case of critical power-unit failure, it is able to safety continue the flight, except when
the failure occurs prior to a defined point after take-off or after a defined point before
landing, in which cases a forced landing may be required. ~

Permit to Fly. in relation to microlight aircraft, means a document issued by
the Director-General of Civil Aviation authorising the flight of a microlight aircraft in
accordance with these rules.

Personnel. in relation to any aircraft means the person in charge, the pilot, the
navigator, the engineer, and all other members of the crew;

Petroleum in Bulk. means petroleum contained in receptacle exceeding 900
liters in capacity;

Pilot-in-command. in respect of a pilot, -

(i) engaged in commercial operations means the pilot designated by the
operator as being in command and charged with the safe conduct of a flight;
and

Gi) engaged in general aviation or helicopter operations means the pilot
designated by the operator or owner as being in command and charged with
the safe conduct of a flight.

Point-in-space Approach (PinS). The point-in-space approach is based on
a basic GNSS non-precision approach procedure designed for helicopters only. It is
aligned with a reference point located to permit subsequent flight manoeuvring or
approach and landing using visual manoeuvring in adequate visual conditions to see
and avoid obstacles.

Point-in-space Reference Point (PRP). Reference point for the point-in-
space approach as identified by the latitude and longitude of the MAPt.

Portrayal. Presentation of information to humans (ISO 19117*).

Position (Geographical). Set of coordinates (latitude and longitude) referenced
to the mathematical reference ellipsoid which define the position of a point on the
surface of the Earth.

Precision approach (PA) procedure. An instrument approach procedure
based on navigation systems (ILS, MLS, GLS and SBAS Cat I) designed for 3D
instrument approach operations Type A or B.

Precision approach runway, see Instrument runway.

Pre-flight Information Bulletin (PIB). A presentation of current NOTAM
information of operational significance, prepared prior to flight.

25

AIR REGULATIONS

Pressure-Altitude. An atmospheric pressure expressed in terms of altitude
which corresponds to that pressure in the Standard Atmosphere.

Primary Area. A defined area symmetrically disposed about the nominal flight
track in which full obstacle clearance is provided. (See also Secondary area.)

Primary Runway(s). Runway(s) used in preference to others whenever
conditions permit.

Private Aircraft. means all aircraft other than aerial work aircraft or public
transport aircraft;

Problematic use of Substances. The use of one or more psychoactive
substances by aviation personnel in a way that: a) constitutes a direct hazard to the
user or endangers the lives, health or welfare of others; and/or b) causes or worsens an
occupational, social, mental or physical problem or disorder.

Procedure Altitude/height. A specified altitude/height flown operationally at
or above the minimum altitude/height and established to accommodate a stabilized
descent at a prescribed descent gradient/angle in the intermediate/final approach
segment.

Procedure Turn (PTN). A manoeuvre in which a turn is made away from a
designated track followed by a turn in the opposite direction to permit the aircraft to
intercept and proceed along the reciprocal of the designated track.

Note 1: — Procedure turns are designated “left” or “right” according to the direction of
the initial turn.

Note 2: — Procedure turns may be designated as being made either in level flight or
while descending, according to the circumstances of each individual procedure.

Prohibited Area. An airspace of defined dimensions, above the land areas or
territorial waters of a State, within which the flight of aircraft is prohibited.

Protected Flight Zones. Airspace specifically designated to mitigate the
hazardous effects of laser radiation.

Psychoactive Substances. Alcohol, opioids, cannabinoids, sedatives and
hypnotics, cocaine, other psychostimulants, hallucinogens, and volatile solvents,
whereas coffee and tobacco are excluded.

Public Transport Aircraft. means an aircraft which effects public transport;

Public Transport. means all carriage of persons or things effected by aircraft
for a remuneration of any nature whatsoever, and all carriage of persons or things
effected by aircraft without such remuneration if the carriage is effected by an air
transport undertaking;

26

--- Page 20 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Q

Quality Assurance. Part of quality management focused on providing
confidence that fulfill quality requirements will be fulfilled (ISO 9000”).

Quality Control. Part of quality management focused on fulfilling quality
requirements will be fulfilled (ISO 9000*).

Quality Management. Coordinated activities to direct and control an
organisation with regard to quality (ISO 9000*).

R

Racetrack Procedure. A procedure designed to enable the aircraft to reduce
altitude during the initial approach segment and/or establish the aircraft inbound
when the entry into a reversal procedure is not practical.

Radiotelephony. A form of radio-communication primarily intended for the
exchange of information in the form of speech.

Rating. means an authorisation entered on a licence and forming part thereof,
stating special conditions, privileges or limitations pertaining to such licence;

RCP Type. A label (e.g. RCP 240) that represents the values assigned to RCP
parameters for communication transaction time, continuity, availability and integrity.

Reference Datum Height (RDH). The height of the extended glide path or a
nominal vertical path at the runway threshold.

Repetitive Flight Plan (RPL). A flight plan related to a series of frequently
recurring, regularly operated individual flights with identical basic features, submitted
by an operator for retention and repetitive use by ATS units.

Reporting Point (REP). A specified geographical location in relation to which
the position of an aircraft can be reported.

Rescue Coordination Centre (RCC). A unit responsible for promoting
efficient organization of search and rescue services and for coordinating the conduct of
search and rescue operations within a search and rescue region.

Rescue Subcentre (RSC). A unit subordinate to a rescue coordination
centre, established to complement the latter according to particular provisions of the
responsible authorities.

Rescue. An operation to retrieve persons in distress, provide for their initial
medical or other needs, and deliver them to a place of safety.

Restricted Area (R...). An airspace of defined dimensions, above the land
areas or territorial waters of a State, within which the flight of aircraft is restricted in
accordance with certain specified conditions.

27

AIR REGULATIONS

Reversal Procedure. A procedure designed to enable aircraft to reverse
direction during the initial approach segment of an instrument approach procedure.
The sequence may include procedure turns or base turns.

Road. An established surface route on the movement area meant for the
exclusive use of vehicles.

Road-holding Position. A designated position at which vehicles may be
required to hold.

Route Stage. A route or portion of a route flown without an intermediate
landing.

Runway (RWY). A defined rectangular area on a land aerodrome prepared for
the landing and take-off of aircraft.

Runway End Safety, Area (RESA). An area symmetrical about the extended
runway centre line and adjacent to the end of the strip primarily intended to reduce
the risk of damage to an aeroplane undershooting or overrunning the runway.

Runway Guard Lights. A light system intended to caution pilots or vehicle
drivers that they are about to enter an active runway.

Runway Strip. A defined area including the runway and stopway, if provided,
intended:

a) toreduce the risk of damage to aircraft running off a runway; and
b) to protect aircraft flying over it during take-off or landing operations.

Runway Turn Pad. A defined area on a land aerodrome adjacent to a runway
for the purpose of completing a 180-degree turn on a runway.

Runway Visual Range (RVR). The range over which the pilot of an aircraft
on the centre line of a runway can see the runway surface markings or the lights
delineating the runway or identifying its centre line.

Runway-holding Position. A designated position intended to protect a
runway, an obstacle limitation surface, or an ILS/MLS critical/sensitive area at which
taxiing aircraft and vehicles shall stop and hold, unless otherwise authorized by the
aerodrome control tower.

Note: — In radiotelephony phraseologies, the expression “holding Point” is used to
designate the runway-holding position.

S

Safety. means the state in which the risk of harm to persons or of property
damage is reduced to and maintained at or below an acceptable level of safety through
a continuing process of hazard identification and risk management. Explanation: —
For the purposes of this clause, “acceptable level of safety” is the minimum degree of
safety that must be assured by a system in actual practice.

28

--- Page 21 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Safety-Sensitive Personnel. Persons who might endanger aviation safety if
they perform their duties and functions improperly including, but not limited to, crew
members, aircraft maintenance personnel and air traffic controllers.

Scheduled Air Transport Service. means an air transport service undertaken
between the same two or more places and operated according to a published time table
or with flights so regular or frequent that they constitute a recognisably systematic
series, each flight being open to use by members of the public;

Seaplane. means an aeroplane capable normally of taking off from and alighting
solely on water;

Search and Rescue Aircraft. An aircraft provided with specialized equipment
suitable for the efficient conduct of search and rescue missions.

Search and Rescue Facility. Any mobile resource, including designated
search and rescue units, used to conduct search and rescue operations.

Search and Rescue Region (SRR). An area of defined dimensions, associated
with a rescue coordination centre, within which search and rescue services are provided.

Search and Rescue Service. The performance of distress monitoring,
communication, coordination and search and rescue functions, initial medical
assistance or medical evacuation, through the use of public and private resources,
including cooperating aircraft, vessels and other craft and installations.

Search and Rescue Unit. A mobile resource composed of trained personnel
and provided with equipment suitable for the expeditious conduct of search and rescue
operations.

Search. An operation normally coordinated by a rescue coordination centre or
rescue subcentre using available personnel and facilities to locate persons in distress.

Secondary Area. A defined area on each side of the primary area located along
the nominal flight track in which decreasing obstacle clearance is provided. (See also
Primary area.)

Segregated Parallel Operations. Simultaneous operations on parallel or near-
parallel instrument runways in which one runway is used exclusively for approaches
and the other runway is used exclusively for departures.

Segregated Parallel Operations. Simultaneous operations on parallel or near-
parallel instrument runways in which one runway is used exclusively for approaches
and the other runway is used exclusively for departures.

Sensitive Flight Zone. The LFFZ and LCFZ where the irradiance is restricted
to a level unlikely to cause flashblindness or after-image effects.

Serious Incident. An incident involving circumstances indicating that an
accident nearly occurred.

29

AIR REGULATIONS

Serious Injury. An injury which is sustained by a person in an accident.

Shoulder. An area adjacent to the edge of a pavement so prepared as to provide
a transition between the pavement and the adjacent surface.

SIGMET Information. Information issued by a meteorological watch office
concerning the occurrence or expected occurrence of specified enroute weather
phenomena which and other phenomena in the atmosphere that may affect the safety
of aircraft operations.

Sign.

a) Fixed message sign. A sign presenting only one message.

b) Variable message sign. A sign capable of presenting several pre-determined
messages or no message, as applicable.

Signal Area. An area on an aerodrome used for the display of ground signals.

Significant Point. A specified geographical location used in defining an ATS
route or the flight path of an aircraft and for other navigation and ATS purposes.
There are three categories of significant points: ground-based navigation aid,

intersection and waypoint. In the context of this definition, intersection is a significant
point expressed as radials, bearings and/or distances from ground-based navigation

aids.

Small Aeroplane. An aeroplane of a maximum certificated take-off mass of
5700 kg or less.

Solo Flight Time. means flight time during which a pilot is the sole occupant
of an aircraft;

Special VFR Flight. A VFR flight cleared by air traffic control to operate within
a control zone in meteorological conditions below VMC.

Standard Instrument Arrival (STAR). A designated instrument flight rule
(IFR) arrival route linking a significant point, normally on an ATS route, with a point
from which a published instrument approach procedure can be commenced.

Standard Instrument Departure (SID). A designated instrument flight rule
(IFR) departure route linking the aerodrome or a specified runway of the aerodrome
with a specified significant point, normally on a designated ATS route, at which the
en-route phase of a flight commences.

State Aircraft. includes military aircraft and aircraft exclusively employed in
the service of the Government such as posts, customs, police.

State of Design. The State having jurisdiction over the organization responsible
for the type design.

State of Manufacture. The State having jurisdiction over the organization
responsible for the final assembly of the aircraft.

30

--- Page 22 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

State of Occurrence. The State in the territory of which an accident or incident
occurs.

State of Registry. The State on whose register the aircraft is entered.
State of Registry. The State on whose register the aircraft is entered.

State of the Operator. The State in which the operator’s principal place of
business is located or, if there is no such place of business, the operator’s permanent
residence.

Stopway. A defined rectangular area on the ground at the end of take-off run
available prepared as a suitable area in which an aircraft can be stopped in the case of
an abandoned take off.

Student Pilot-in-Command. means a trainee pilot, acting as _ Pilot-in-
Command under observation of a flight instructor, who shall not manipulate the flight
controls of an aircraft or influence the flight during flight time except when the safety
of the aircraft is jeopartised.

Note: — In the event the instructor manipulates the flight controls during the flight, the
flight shall be deemed to be a dual instructional flight.

Subsequent Aircraft. means an aircraft which is constructed in accordance
with the design and specification of a type of aircraft, which has been approved or
accepted by the Central Government for the issue of a certificate of airworthiness;

Survival ELT (ELT(S)). An ELT which is removable from an aircraft, stowed
so as to facilitate its ready use in an emergency, and manually activated by survivors.

Synthetic Flight Trainer. Any one of the following three types of apparatus in
which flight conditions are simulated on the ground:

T

Take-off Alternate. An alternate aerodrome at which an aircraft can land
should this become necessary shortly after take-off and it is not possible to use the
aerodrome of departure.

Take-off Runway. A runway intended for take-off only.

Taxiing (TAX). Movement of an aircraft on the surface of an aerodrome under
its own power, excluding take-off and landing.

Taxiway (TWY). A defined path on a land aerodrome established for the taxiing
of aircraft and intended to provide a link between one part of the aerodrome and
another, including:

a) Aircraft stand taxilane. A portion of an apron designated as a taxiway and
intended to provide access to aircraft stands only.

31:

AIR REGULATIONS

b) Apron taxiway. A portion of a taxiway system located or an apron and
intended to provide a through taxi route across the apron.

c) Rapid exit taxiway. A taxiway connected to a runway at an acute angle and
designed to allow landing aeroplanes to turn off at higher speeds than are
achieved on other exit taxiways thereby minimizing runway occupancy
times.

Taxiway Intersection. A junction of two or more taxiways.

Taxiway Strip. An area including a taxiway intended to protect an aircraft
operating on the taxiway and to reduce the risk of damage to an aircraft accidentally
running off the taxiway.

Temporary Aerodrome. means an aerodrome intended to be used:for a period
not exceeding six months;

Terminal Control Area (TMA). A control area normally established at the
confluence of ATS routes in the vicinity of one or more major aerodromes.

Terrain. The surface of the Earth containing naturally occurring features such
as mountains, hills, ridges, valleys, bodies of water, permanent ice and snow, and
excluding obstacles. In practical terms, depending on the method of data collection
used, terrain represents the continuous surface that exists at the bare Earth, the top
of the canopy or something in-between, also known as “first reflective surface”.

Threshold (THR). The beginning of that portion of the runway usable for
landing.

To Pilot. means to manipulate the flight controls of an aircraft during flight
time.

Total Estimated Elapsed Time. For IFR flights, the estimated time required
from take-off to arrive over that designated point, defined by reference to navigation
aids, from which it is intended that an instrument approach procedure will be
commenced, or, if no navigation aid is associated with the destination aerodrome, to
arrive over the destination aerodrome. For VFR flights, the estimated time required
from take-off to arrive over the destination aerodrome.

Touchdown Zone (TDZ). The portion of a runway, beyond the threshold, where
it is intended landing aeroplanes first contact the runway.

Track (TR). The projection on the earth’s surface of the path of an aircraft, the
direction of which path at any point is usually expressed in degrees from North (true,
magnetic or grid).

Traffic Avoidance Advice. Advice provided by an air traffic services unit
specifying maneuvers to assist a pilot to avoid a collision.

Traffic Information. Information issued by an air traffic services unit to alert
a pilot to other known or observed air traffic which may be in proximity to the position
or intended route of flight and to help the pilot avoid a collision.

32

--- Page 23 ---

DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Transfer of Control Point. A defined point located along the flight path of
an aircraft, at which the responsibility for providing air traffic control service to the
aircraft is transferred from one control unit or control position to the next.

Transferring Unit. Air traffic control unit in the process of transferring the
responsibility for providing air traffic control service to an aircraft to the next air
traffic control unit along the route of flight.

Transition Altitude (TA). The altitude at or below which the vertical position
of an aircraft is controlled by reference to altitudes.

Transition Layer. The airspace between the transition altitude and the
transition level.

Transition Level (TRL). The lowest flight level available for use above the
transition altitude.

Type Certificate. means a certificate issued or validated by the Director-
General to signify that the design of a type of aircraft, aircraft component or item of
equipment, complies with the applicable design standard specified or approved by the
Director-General;

Type of Aircraft. means all aircraft of the same basic design including all
modifications thereto except those modifications which result in a change in handing
or flight characteristics;

Type Rating. means a rating for each type of aircraft;

U

Uncertainty Phase (INCERFA). A situation wherein uncertainty exists as to
the safety of an aircraft and its occupants.

Under Control. an aircraft is said to be “under control” when it is able to
manoeuvre as required by these rules;

Unmanned Free Balloon. A non-power-driven, unmanned, lighter-than-air
aircraft in free flight.

Note: — Unmanned free balloons are classified as heavy ,medium or light in accordance
with specifications contained in Appendix 8.

Vv

VFR Flight. A flight conducted in accordance with the visual flight rules.
VFR. The symbol used to designate the visual flight rules.

Visibility (VIS). Visibility for aeronautical purposes is the greater of: a) the
greatest distance at which a black object of suitable dimensions, situated near the

33

AIR REGULATIONS

ground, can be seen and recognized when observed against a bright background; b)
the greatest distance at which lights in the vicinity of 1000 candelas can be seen and
identified against an unlit background.

Note 1: — The two distances have different values in air of a given extinction coefficient,
and the latter b) varies with the background illumination. The former a) is represented
by the meteorological optical range (MOR).

Note. 2.— The definition applies to the observations of visibility in local routine and
special reports, to the observations of prevailing and minimum visibility reported in
METAR and SPECI and to the observations of ground visibility.

Visible. as applied to lights means visible on a dark night with a clear
atmosphere.

Visual Manoeuvring (circling) Area. The area in which obstacle clearance
should be taken into consideration for aircraft carrying out a circling approach.

Visual Meteorological Conditions(VMC). Meteorological conditions
expressed in terms of visibility, distance from cloud, and ceiling, equal to or better than
specified minima.

VMC. The symbol used to designate visual meteorological conditions.

Voice-automatic Terminal Information Service (Voice-ATIS). The
provision of ATIS by means of continuous and repetitive voice broadcasts.

VOLMET Broadcast. Provision, as appropriate, of current METAR, SPECI,
TAF and SIGMET by means of continuous and repetitive voice broadcasts.

VOLMET. Meteorological information for aircraft in flight.

Ww

Waypoint (WPT). A specified geographical location used to define an area
navigation route or the flight path of an aircraft employing area navigation. Waypoints
are identified as either: Fly-by waypoint. A waypoint which requires turn anticipation
to allow tangential interception of the next segment of a route or procedure, or Flyover
waypoint. A waypoint at which a turn is initiated in order to join the next segment of a
route or procedure.

Wet/Dry runway. A runway is considered to be wet when the runway surface
is covered by any visible dampness or water up to and including 3 mm deep within the
intended area of use. A runway is considered dry if its surface is free of visible moisture
and not contaminated within the area intended to be used.

34

--- Page 24 ---

2

INTERNATIONAL
ORGANISATIONS AND
CONVENTIONS

PARIS CONVENTION, 1917

It was held to regulate air navigation with particular attention to sovereinity,

airworthiness, competency of aircrew, definitions etc.

CHICAGO CONVENTION, 1944

Chicago convention consisting of 96 articles was signed on 7 Dec 1944. India has
ratified this convention. Some important articles are listed below:

AIR NAVIGATION

Article 1 - Sovereignty: The contracting States recognize that every State has
complete and exclusive sovereignty over the airspace above its territory.

Article 2 - Territory: For the purposes of this Convention the territory of a
State shall be deemed to be the land areas and territorial waters adjacent thereto
under the sovereignty, suzerainty, protection or mandate of such State.

Article 3 - Civil and state aircraft:

a) This Convention shall be applicable only to civil aircraft, and shall not be
applicable to state aircraft.

b) Aircraft used in military, customs and police services shall be deemed to be
state aircraft.

35

AIR REGULATIONS
c) Nostate aircraft of a contracting State shall fly over the territory of another
State or land thereon without authorization by special agreement or
otherwise, and in accordance with the terms thereof.
“d) -.The contracting States undertake, when issuing regulations for their state
aircraft, that they will have due regard for the safety of navigation of civil
aircraft.

Article 4 - Misuse of Civil Aviation: Each contracting State agrees not to use
civil aviation for any purpose inconsistent with the aims of this Convention.

FLIGHT OVER TERRITORY OF CONTRACTING STATES

Article 5 - Right of non-scheduled Flight: Although the operations of
scheduled aircraft are restricted, under Article 5, aircraft engaged in non scheduled
flights enjoy the right to fly into or across the territory of another State, and to make
stops for non traffic purposes (first and second freedom rights). However, the State
flown over has the right to require the non scheduled aircraft to land, and to follow
prescribed routes, or obtain special permission for such flights.

Article 6 - Scheduled Air Services: No scheduled international air service
may be operated over or into the territory of a contracting State, except with the special
permission or other authorization of that State, and in accordance with the terms of
such permission or authorization.

Article 7 - Cabotage: Each contracting State shall have the right to refuse
permission to the aircraft of other contracting States to take on in its territory
passengers, mail and cargo carried for remuneration or hire and destined for another
point within its territory. Each contracting State undertakes not to enter into any
arrangements which specifically grant any such privilege on an exclusive basis to
any other State or an airline of any other State, and not to obtain any such exclusive
privilege from any other State.

Article 8 - Pilotless Aircraft: No aircraft capable of being flown without a pilot
shall be flown without a pilot over the territory of a contracting State without special
authorization by that State and in accordance with the terms of such authorization.
Each contracting State undertakes to insure that the flight of such aircraft without a
pilot in regions open to civil aircraft shall be so controlled as to obviate danger to civil
aircraft. :

Article 9 - Prohibited Areas: Each contracting State may, for reasons of

military necessity or public safety, restrict or prohibit uniformly the aircraft of other
States from flying over certain areas of its territory.

Article 10 - Landing at Customs Airport: The state can require that landing
to be made at a designated customs airport and similarly departure from the territory
can be required to be from a designated customs airport.

36

--- Page 25 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

Article 11 - Applicability of Air Regulations: All aircraft are to be treated
equal while operating from or in the territory of a nation, irrespective of their
nationality.

Article 12 - Rules of the Air: Each contracting State undertakes to adopt
measures to insure that every aircraft flying over or maneuvering within its territory
and that every aircraft carrying its nationality mark, wherever such aircraft may be,
shall comply with the rules and regulations relating to the flight and maneuver of
aircraft there in force. Each contracting State undertakes to keep its own regulations
in these respects uniform, to the greatest possible extent, with those established from
time to time under this Convention. Over the high seas, the rules in force shall be those
established under this Convention. Each contracting State undertakes to insure the
prosecution of all persons violating the regulations applicable.

Article 13 - Entry and Clearance Regulations: The laws and regulations of
a contracting State as to the admission to or departure from its territory of passengers,
crew or cargo of aircraft, such as regulations relating to entry, clearance, immigration,
passports, customs, and quarantine shall be complied with by or on behalf of such
passengers, crew or cargo upon entrance into or departure from, or while within the
territory of that State.

Article 14 - Prevention of Spread of Disease: Each contracting State agrees
to take effective measures to prevent the spread by means of air navigation of cholera,
typhus (epidemic, smallpox, yellow fever, plague, and such other communicable
diseases as the contracting States shall from time to time decide to designate.

Article 15 - Airport and Similar Charges: Every state shall provide airports
and air navigation services available to its’ own aircraft to all aircraft from other
contracting states. Airport and similar charges will not be more than those that will be
paid by its’ national aircraft.

Article 16 - Search of Aircraft: The appropriate authorities of each of the
contracting States shall have the right, without unreasonable delay, to search aircraft
of the other contracting States on landing or departure, and to inspect the certificates
and other documents prescribed by this Convention.

NATIONALITY OF AIRCRAFT

Article 17 - Nationality of Aircraft: Aircraft have the nationality of the State
in which they are registered.

Article 18 - Dual Registration: An aircraft cannot be validly registered in
more than one State, but its registration may be changed from one State to another.

Article 19 - National laws governing registration: The registration or
transfer of registration of aircraft in any contracting State shall be made in accordance
with its law and regulations.

Article 20 - Display of Marks: Every aircraft engaged in international air
navigation shall bear its appropriate nationality and registration marks.

37

AIR REGULATIONS

Article 21 - Report of Registrations: The registering State must report to
ICAO data revealing the ownership and control of aircraft it registers. It also must
make available to other contracting States, or ICAO, information available concerning
the registration and ownership of aircraft registered in it, on demand.

MEASURES TO FACILITATE AIR NAVIGATION

Article 22 - Facilitation of Formalities: Each contracting State agrees to
adopt all practicable measures, to facilitate and expedite navigation by aircraft between
the territories of contracting States, and to prevent unnecessary delays to aircraft,
crews, passengers and cargo, especially in the administration of the laws relating to
immigration, quarantine, customs and clearance.

Article 23 - Customs and Immigration Procedures: Each contracting State
undertakes, so far as it may find practicable, to establish customs and immigration
procedures affecting international air navigation in accordance with the practices which
may be established or recommended from time to time, pursuant to this Convention.

Article 24 - Customs Duty: Aircraft flying to, from or across, the territory
of a state shall be admitted temporarily free of duty. Fuel, Oil, spare parts, regular
equipment and aircraft stores retained on board are also exempt custom duty,
inspection fees or similar charges.

Article 25 - Aircraft in Distress: Each contracting State undertakes to
provide such measures of assistance to aircraft in distress in its territory as it may
find practicable.

Article 26 - Investigation of Accidents: In the event of an accident to an
aircraft of a contracting State occurring in the territory of another contracting State,
and involving death or serious injury, or indicating serious technical defect in the
aircraft or air navigation facilities, the State in which the accident occurs will institute
as laws permit, with the procedure which may be recommended by the International
Civil Aviation Organization. The State in which the aircraft is registered shall be given
the opportunity to appoint observers to be present at the inquiry and the State holding
the inquiry shall communicate the report and findings in the matter to that State.

Article 27 - Exemption from Seizure on Patent Claims: An aircraft on
flight can not be seized for violation of patent laws of a state..

Aaticle 28 - Air Navigation Facilities and Standard Systems: Each state
should provide airports, navigation facilities, met facilities, radio, charts, maps etc. to
confirm to the convention specifications.

38

--- Page 26 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

CONDITIONS TO BE FULFILLED WITH RESPECT
TO AIRCRAFT

Article 29-Documents Carried in Aircraft: Every aircraft of a contracting
State, engaged in international navigation, shall carry the following documents in
conformity with the conditions prescribed in this Convention:

a) Its certificate of registration;
b) Its certificate of airworthiness;
c) The appropriate licenses for each member of the crew;
d) Its journey log book;
e) Ifit is equipped with radio apparatus, the aircraft radio station license;
f) Ifit carries passetigers, a list of their names and places of embarkation and
destination;
‘g) Ifit carries cargo, a manifest and detailed declarations of the cargo.

Article 30 - Aircraft Radio Equipment: The aircraft of a state flying in or
over the territory of another state shall carry radios licensed and used in accordance
with the regulations of the state in which the aircraft is registered. The radios may
only be used by members of the flight crew suitably licensed by the state in which the
aircraft is registered.

; Article 31 - Certificates of airworthiness: Every aircraft engaged in
international navigation shall be provided with a certificate of airworthiness issued or
rendered valid by the State in which it is registered.

Article 32 - Licenses of Personnel:

a) The pilot of every aircraft and the other members of the operating crew of
every aircraft engaged in international navigation shall be provided with
certificates of competency and licenses issued or rendered valid by the State
in which the aircraft is registered.

b) Each contracting State reserves the right to refuse to recognize, for the pur-
pose of flight above its own territory, certificates of competency and licenses
granted to any of its nationals by another contracting State.

Article 33 - Recognition of Certificates and Licenses: Certificates of
airworthiness and certificates of competency and licenses issued or rendered valid
by the contracting State in which the aircraft is registered, shall be recognized as
valid by the other contracting States, provided that the requirements under which
such certificates or licenses were issued or rendered valid are equal to or above the
minimum standards which may be established from time to time pursuant to this
Convention.

Article 34 - Journey Log Books: There shall be maintained in respect of
every aircraft engaged in international navigation a journey log book in which shall be
entered particulars of the aircraft, its crew and of éach journey, in such form as may be
prescribed from time to time pursuant to this Convention.

39

AIR REGULATIONS

Article 35 - Cargo restrictions: No munitions of war or any item prohibited to
be carried by a state shall be carried. ;

Article 36 - Photographic Apparatus: Each contracting State may prohibit
or regulate the use of photographic apparatus in aircraft over its territory.

INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS AND
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

Article 37 - Adoption of International Standards and Procedures: Each
contracting State undertakes to collaborate in securing the highest practicable degree
of uniformity in regulations, standards, procedures, and organization in relation
to aircraft, personnel, airways and auxiliary services in all matters in which such
uniformity will facilitate and improve air navigation. To this end the International
Civil Aviation Organization shall adopt and amend from time to time, as may be
necessary, international standards and recommended practices and procedures.

Article 38 - Departures from International Standards and Procedures:
Any State which finds it impracticable to comply in all respects with any such
international standard or procedure, or to bring its own regulations or practices
into full accord with any international standard or procedure after amendment of
the latter, or which deems it necessary to adopt regulations or practices differing in
any particular respect from those established by an international standard, shall
give immediate notification to the International Civil Aviation Organization of the
differences between its own practice and that established by the international standard.
In the case of amendments to international standards, any State which does not make
the appropriate amendments to its own regulations or practices shall give notice to
the Council within sixty days of the adoption of the amendment to the international
standard, or indicate the action which it proposes to take. In any such case, the Council
shall make immediate notification to all other states of the difference which exists
between one or more features of an international standard and the corresponding
national practice of that State.

Article 39 - Endorsement of Certificates and Licenses: Any aircraft
not satisfying the international requirements of airworthiness and any person not
satisfying such requirements for licence shall get the certificate/licence endorsed

giving full details.

Article 40 - Validity of Endorsed Certificates and Licenses: No aircraft or
personnel having certificates or licenses so endorsed shall participate in international
navigation, except with the permission of the State or States whose territory is entered.
The registration or use of any such aircraft, or of any certificated aircraft part, in any
State other than that in which it was originally certificated shall be at the discretion
of the State into which the aircraft or part is imported.

Article 41 - Recognition of Existing Standards of Airworthiness: The
provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to aircraft and aircraft equipment of
types of which the prototype is submitted to the appropriate national authorities for

40

--- Page 27 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

certification prior to a date three years after the date of adoption of an international
standard of airworthiness for such equipment.

Article 42 - Recognition of Existing Standards of Competency of
Personnel: The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to personnel whose licences
are originally issued prior to a date one year after initial adoption of an international
standard of qualification for such personnel; but they shall in any case apply to all
personnel whose licenses remain valid five years after the date of adoption of such
standard.

ICAO

The International Civil Aviation Organization, a UN Specialized Agency, is the global
forum for civil aviation. ICAO works to achieve its vision of safe, secure and sustainable
development of civil aviation through cooperation amongst its member States.

Name and composition

An organization named the International Civil Aviation. Organization is formed by
the Chicago Convention,1944. It is made up of an Assembly, a Council, and such other
bodies as may be necessary.

Organisation
Objectives

The aims and objectives of the Organization are to develop the principles and
techniques of international air navigation and to foster the planning and development
of international air transport so as to:

a) Insure the safe and orderly growth of international civil aviation throughout
the world;

b) Encourage the arts of aircraft design and operation for peaceful purposes;

c) Encourage the development of airways, airports, and air navigation facilities
for international civil aviation;

d) Meet the needs of the peoples of the world for safe, regular, efficient and
economical air transport;

e) Prevent economic waste caused by unreasonable competition;

f) Insure that the rights of contracting States are fully respected and that
every contracting State has a fair opportunity to operate international
airlines;

g) Avoid discrimination between contracting States;

h) Promote safety of flight in international air navigation;

i) Promote generally the development of all aspects of international civil
aeronautics

41

AIR REGULATIONS

ASSEMBLY

It is the highest body, meets not less than
once in three years.

All Contracting States one member one vote

COUNCIL

36 Contracting States elected by the Assembly
(President of the Council is elected by the Council)

THE SECRETARIAT

COMMISSIONS AND
COMMITTEES

(Secretary-General appointed
by the council.)

(Each of between nine and
fifteen members.)

Air Navigation
Bureau.

Air Navigation Commission
19 members appointed by the Council.

Air Transport
Bureau.

Air Transport Committee
Appointed by the Council.

Technical Assistance
Bureau.

Legal Committee
Committee on Joint Support of Air

Navigation Services Legal Bureau.

Not more than 11 members, with not less Bureau of

than 9 members, appointed by the Council. Administration and
Finance Committee Services.

Not more than 13 members, with not less
than 9 members, appointed by the Council.

Committee on Unlawful Interference
15 members appointed by the Council.

42

--- Page 28 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

Membership
International Civil Aviation Organization member states:

ICAO members are 193 of the United Nations members including a non member of
UNO, the Cook Islands.

The non-member states are Liechtenstein, Niue, Tuvalu, Vatican City and the states
with limited recognition.

World Headquarters, Regions and regional offices:

ICAO World Headquarters: Montreal,Canada

The ICAO has seven regional offices serving nine regions:

1. Asia and Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand
Middle East, Cairo, Egypt
Western and Central Africa, Dakar, Senegal
South America, Lima, Peru
North America, Central America and Caribbean, Mexico City, Mexico
Eastern and Southern Africa, Nairobi, Kenya
. Europe and North Atlantic, Paris, France
Regional Air Navigation (RAN) meetings are held periodically to consider
the requirements of air operations within specified geographic areas.

ICAO TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS:

International Standards and Recommended Practices are adopted by the
Council in accordance with Articles 54, 87 and 90 of the Convention on International
Civil Aviation and are designated, for convenience, as Annexes to the Convention.
The uniform application by Contracting States of the specifications contained in the
International Standards is recognized as necessary for the safety or regularity of
international air navigation while the uniform application of the specifications in the
Recommended Practices is regarded as desirable in the interest of safety, regularity
or efficiency of international air navigation. In the event of non-compliance with an

AIS AP wh

43

AIR REGULATIONS

International Standard, a State has, in fact, an obligation, under Article 38 of the
Convention, to notify the Council of any differences. Knowledge of differences from
Recommended Practices may also be important for the safety of air navigation
and, although the Convention does not impose any obligation with regard thereto, the
Council has invited Contracting States to notify such differences in addition to those
relating to International Standards.

Procedures for Air Navigation Services (PANS). Are approved by the Council
for worldwide application. They contain, for the most part, operating procedures
regarded as not yet having attained a sufficient degree of maturity for adoption as
International Standards and Recommended Practices, as well as material of a more
permanent character which is considered too detailed for incorporation in an Annex, or
is susceptible to frequent amendment, for which the processes of the Convention would
be too cumbersome.

Regional Supplementary Procedures (SUPPS). Have a status similar to
that of PANS in that they are approved by the Council, but only for application in the
respective regions.

Technical Manuals provide guidance and information in amplification of the
International Standards, Recommended Practices and PANS, the implementation of
which they are designed to facilitate.

Air Navigation Plans detail requirements for facilities and services for
international air navigation in the respective ICAO Air Navigation Regions.

ICAO Circulars make available specialized information of interest to
Contracting States. This includes studies on technical subjects.

ICAO STANDARDS

Annexes 2, 5, 7 & 8 contain international standards and no recommended
practices (RPs). The remaining 15 Annexes contain both.

Annex 1: Personal Licensing

Annex 2: Rules of the Air

Annex 3: Meteorological Service for International Air Navigation
Annex 4: Aeronautical Charts

Annex 5: Units of Measurement to be Used in Air and Ground
Annex 6: Operation of Aircraft:

Part I : International Commercial Air Transport

PT ek SN

Part II : International General Aviation
Part III : International Operations — Helicopters

7. Annex7: Aircraft Nationality and Registration Marks

44

--- Page 29 ---

10.

11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

Annex 8: Airworthiness of Aircraft
Annex 9: Facilitation

Annex 10: Aeronautical Telecommunication

Vol. I: Radio Navigational Aids

Vol. II : Communication Procedures

Vol. ITI : Communication Systems

Vol. IV : Surveillance Radar and Collision Avoidance Systems

Vol. V : Aeronautical Radio Frequency Spectrum Utilisation

Annex 11: Air Traffic Services

Annex 12: Search and Rescue

Annex 13: Aircraft Accident Investigation

Annex 14: Aerodromes:

Vol. I: Aerodrome Design and Operations
Vol. II: Heliports

Annex 15: Aeronautical Information Service

Annex 16: Environmental Protection:

Vol. I: Aircraft Noise
Vol. II: Aircraft Engine Emissions

Annex 17: Safeguarding International Civil Aviation against Acts of Unlawful
Interference

Annex 18: Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air
Annex 19: Safety Management

Documents

O1. Doc 4444:

02. Doc 7030:
03. Doc 8400 :
04. Doc 8168 :
05. Doc 7910:

ICAO RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

Procedure for Air Navigation Services — Air Traffic Management
(PANS ATM).

Regional Supplementary Procedures (SUPPS).
ICAO Abbreviations and Codes
Aircraft Operations

Location Indicators

45

06. Doc 8585 :

07. Doc 8643 :
08. Doc 8126 :
09. Doc 8697 :
10. Doc 8896 :
11. Doc 7383 :
12. Doc 7101:
13. Doc 7100:
14. Doc 7333 :
15. Doc 9432 :
16. Doc 9137 :
17. Doc 9426 :
18. Doc 9674 :
19. ISO 8402:
20. Doc 9691 :

21. Doc 9438 :
22. Doc 9554 :

23. Doc 9613 :
24. Doc 9156 :
25. Doc 6920 :
26. Doc 9422 :
27. Doc 9342 :
28. Doc 9750 :
29. Doc 9849 :
30. Doc 9688 :
31. Doc 8071 :
32. Doc 96864 :
33. Doc 9694 :

AIR REGULATIONS

Designators for Aircraft Operating Agencies, Aeronautical
Authorities and Services

Aircraft Type Designator

Aeronautical Information Service Manual
Aeronautical Chart Manual

Manual of Aeronautical Meteorological Procedure
Aeronautical Information Service by States
Aeronautical Chart Catalogue

Manual of Airport and Air Navigation Facility Tariffs
Search And Rescue Manual

Manual of Radio Telephony

Airport Service Manual

Air Traffic Service Planning Manual

WGS — 84 Manual

ISO Standard — 8402

Manual of Volcanic Ash, Radio Active Material and Toxic Chemical
Clouds

Manual Concerning Interception of Civil Aircraft

Manual Concerning Safety Measures Relating to Military
Activities Hazardous to Civil Aircraft Operations

Manual on RNP (Co-located with RNAV Manual
Accident/Incident Reporting Manual

Manual of Aircraft Accident Investigation

Accident Prevention Manual

Aerodromes, Air Routes and Ground Aids

Global Air Navigation Plan for CNS/ATM Systems
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) Manual
Manual on Mode § Specific Services

Manual on Testing of Radio Navigation Aide

Manual on the Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR) Systems
Manual of Air Traffic Services Data Link Applications

46

--- Page 30 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

THE INTERNATIONAL AIR SERVICES TRANSIT
AGREEMENT, 1944

Signed at Chicago on 7th Dec, 1944,it was ratified by India.

Each Contracting State grants to the other contracting States the following “Technical
Freedoms of the Air” in respect of scheduled international air services :

TECHNICAL FREEDOMS OF THE AIR:
First Freedom of Air: The privilege to fly across its territory without landing;

Second Freedom of Air: The privilege to land for non-traffic purposes:

THE INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORT AGREEMENT
Signed at Chicago on 7th Dec, 1944 it was not ratified by India.

Each Contracting State grants to the other contracting States the Technical Freedoms
of the Air in respect of scheduled international air services as specified above. In
addition, the following “Commercial Freedoms of the Air” are granted:

COMMERCIAL FREEDOMS OF THE AIR:

Third Freedom of Air : The privilege to put down passengers, mail and cargo taken
on in the territory of the State whose nationality the aircraft possesses;

Fourth Freedom of Air: The privilege to take on passengers, mail and cargo destined
for the territory of the State whose nationality the aircraft possesses;

Fifth Freedom of Air: The privilege to take on passengers, mail and cargo destined for
the territory of any other Contracting State and the privilege to put down passengers,
mail and cargo coming from any such territory.

UNLAWFUL ACTS

Following conventions were held to deal with unlawful acts associated with Aviation,
and ratified by India:

CONVENTION ON OFFENCES AND CERTAIN OTHER ACTS COMMITTED
ON BOARD AIRCRAFT, SIGNED AT TOKYO, ON, 14 SEPTEMBER 1963
(TOKYO CONVENTION.)

SCOPE OF THE CONVENTION
Article 1:

1. This Convention shall apply in respect of:
a) offences against penal law;
b) acts which, whether or not they are offences, may or do jeopardize

47

AIR REGULATIONS

the safety of the aircraft or of persons or property therein or which
jeopardize good order and discipline on board.

2. Convention shall apply in respect of offences committed or acts done by a
person on board any aircraft registered in a Contracting State, while that
aircraft is in flight or on the surface of the high seas or of any other area
outside the territory of any State.

3. For the purposes of this Convention, an aircraft is considered to be in flight
from the moment when power is applied for the purpose of take off until the
moment when the landing run ends.

4. This Convention shall not apply to aircraft used in military, customs or po-
lice services. ;

Article 2: No provision of this Convention shall be interpreted as authorizing or
requiring any action in respect of offences against penal laws of a political nature or
those based on racial or religious discrimination.

JURISDICTION:

Article 3:

1. The State of registration of the aircraft is competent to exercise jurisdiction
over offences and acts committed on board.

2. Each Contracting State shall take such measures as may be necessary to
establish its jurisdiction as the State of registration over offences committed
on board aircraft registered in such State.

3. This Convention does not exclude any criminal jurisdiction exercised in ac-
cordance with national law.

Article 4: A Contracting State which is not the State of registration may not interfere
with an aircraft in flight in order to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over an offence
committed on board except in the following cases:

a) the offence has effect on the territory of such State;

b) the offence has been committed by or against a national or permanent
resident of such State;

c) the offence is against the security of such State;

d) the offence consists of a breach of any rules or regulations relating to the
flight or manoeuvre of aircraft in force in such State;

e) the exercise of jurisdiction is necessary to ensure the observance of any ob-
ligation of such State under a multilateral international agreement.

POWERS OF THE AIRCRAFT COMMANDER:

Article 5:

1. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to offences and acts committed
or about to be committed by a person on board an aircraft in flight in the
airspace of the State of registration or over the high seas or any other
area outside the territory of any State unless the last point of takeoff or

48

--- Page 31 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

the next point of intended landing is situated in a State other than that
of registration, or the aircraft subsequently flies in the airspace of a State
other than that of registration with such person still on board.

2. An aircraft shall for the purposes of this Chapter, be considered to be in
flight at any time from the moment when all its external doors are closed
following embarkation until the moment when any such door is opened for
disembarkation. In the case of a forced landing, the provisions of this Chap-
ter shall continue to apply with respect to offences and acts committed on
board until competent authorities of a State take over the responsibility for
the aircraft and for the persons and property on board.

Article 6:

1. The aircraft commander may, when he has reasonable grounds to believe
that a person has committed, or is about to commit, on board the aircraft,
an offence or act contemplated in Article 1, paragraph 1, impose upon such
person reasonable measures including restraint which are necessary:

a) to protect the safety of the aircraft, or of persons or property therein; or

b) to maintain good order and discipline on board; or

c) to enable him to deliver such person to competent authorities or to
disembark him in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

2. The aircraft commander may require or authorize the assistance of other
crew members and may request or authorize, but not require, the assistance
of passengers to restrain any person whom he is entitled to restrain. Any
crew member or passenger may also take reasonable preventive measures
without such authorization when he has reasonable grounds to believe that
such action is immediately necessary to protect the safety of the aircraft, or
of persons or property therein.

Article 7:
1. Measures of restraint imposed upon a person in accordance with Article 6
shall not be continued beyond any point at which the aircraft lands unless:
a) such point is in the territory of a non-Contracting State and its
authorities refuse to permit disembarkation of that person or those
measures have been imposed in accordance with Article 6, paragraph
1c) in order to enable his delivery to competent authorities;

b) the aircraft makes a forced landing and the aircraft commander is
unable to deliver that person to competent authorities; or

c) that person agrees to onward carriage under restraint.

2. The aircraft commander shall as soon as practicable, and if possible before
landing in the territory of a State with a person on board who has been
placed under restraint in accordance with the provisions of Article 6, notify
the authorities of such State of the fact that a person on board is under
restraint and of the reasons for such restraint.

49

AIR REGULATIONS

THE HAGUE CONVENTION OF 1970

Following the Tokyo Convention, and after a spate of politically motivated terrorists
hijackings. ICAO called a convention hosted by the Dutch government to address this
problem. The Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft defines
the act of unlawful seizure and the measures to be taken by contracting states to
enforce severe punishment upon perpetrators. This agreement specifies extradition of
offenders and obliges contracting states to extradite offenders.

THE MONTREAL CONVENTION OF 1971

The Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the safety of Civil
Aviation compliments the Hague Convention by making it an offence to:

® commit acts of violence on board aircraft that endanger people and property
and the safety of the aircraft.

m Destroy an aircraft in service or cause damage which renders the aircraft
incapable of flight or which is likely to endanger the safety of flight.

= Place a device on board an aircraft that is likely to destroy the aircraft,
damage it, or render it unfit for flight.

= Destroy or damage any navigation facility or interference with its correct
operation.

s Interfere with aircraft communications or transmit information known to
be false that endangers the safety of an aeroplane in flight.

MONTREAL PROTOCOL, 1988

This extended the Montreal Convention to include offence committed at aerodromes
serving international civil aviation, including the intentional use of any device,
substance or weapon:

Likely to cause serious injury or death.

To destroy or seriously damage the facilities of an airport.
To destroy or damage aircraft not in service at the airport.
To disrupt the services at an airport.

THE MONTREAL CONVENTION, 1991

Convention on the marking of plastic explosives for the purpose of detection was signed
at Montreal on 1st march, 1991.

Tokyo Convention 1963, Hague Convention 1970, Montreal Conventions 1971 and
1991 and Montreal Protocol 1988 have been ratified by India.

50

--- Page 32 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

INDIAN ORGANISATIONS.

Ministry of Civil Aviation
Government Of India

Located at Rajiv Gandhi Bhavan at the Safdarjung Airport in New Delhi, the Ministry
of Civil Aviation is responsible for formulation of national policies and programmes
for the development and regulation of the Civil Aviation sector in the country.:It is
responsible for the administration of the Aircraft Act, 1934, Aircraft Rules, 1937 and
various other legislations pertaining to the aviation sector in the country. This Ministry
exercises administrative control over attached and autonomous organizations like the
Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security and Indira
Gandhi Rashtriya Udan Academy and affiliated Public Sector Undertakings like
National Aviation Company of India Limited, Airports Authority of India and Pawan
Hans Helicopters Limited. The Commission of Railway Safety, which is responsible for
safety in rail travel and operations in terms of the provisions of the Railways Act, 1989
also comes under the administrative control of this Ministry.

The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA. is the regulatory body in
the field of Civil Aviation, primarily dealing with safety issues. It is responsible for
regulation of air transport services to/from/within India and for enforcement of civil air
regulations, air safety, and airworthiness standards. The DGCA also co-ordinates all
regulatory functions with the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO..

The functions of DGCA include the following:

1. Registration of civil aircraft;

2. Formulation of standards of airworthiness for civil aircraft registered in
India and grant of certificates of airworthiness to such aircraft;

3. Licensing of pilots, aircraft maintenance engineers and flight engineers,
and conducting examinations and checks for that purpose;

4, Licensing of air traffic controllers;

Certification of aerodromes and CNS/ATM facilities;

6. Granting of Air Operator’s Certificates to Indian carriers and regulation
of air transport services operating to/from/within/over India by Indian
and foreign operators, including clearance of scheduled and non-scheduled
flights of such operators;

7. Conducting investigation into accidents/incidents and taking accident
prevention measures including formulation of implementation of Safety
Aviation Management programmes.

8. Carrying out amendments to the Aircraft Act, the Aircraft Rules and the

an

51

AIR REGULATIONS

Civil Aviation Requirements/AICs/Circulars etc. for complying with the
amendments to ICAO Annexes, and initiating proposals for amendment
to any other Act or for passing a new Act in order to give effect to an
international Convention or amendment to an existing Convention; _

9. Coordination at national level for flexi-use of air space by civil and military
air traffic agencies and interaction with ICAO for provision of more air
routes for civil use through Indian air space;

10. Keeping a check on aircraft noise and engine emissions in accordance with
ICAO Annex 16 and collaborating with the environmental authorities in
this matter, if required;

11. Promoting indigenous design and manufacture of aircraft and aircraft
components by acting as a catalytic agent;

12. Approving training programmes of operators for carriage of dangerous
goods, issuing authorizations for carriage of dangerous goods, etc.

The Airports Authority of India (AAI). Was formed on Ist April 1995 by
merging the International Airports Authority of India and the National Airports
Authority with a view to accelerate the integrated development, expansion, and
modernization of the operational, terminal and cargo facilities at the airports in the
country conforming to international standards.

The main functions of Airports Authority of India are as under:

1. Design, Development, Operation and Maintenance of international and
domestic airports and civil enclaves.

2. Control and Management of the Indian airspace extending beyond the

territorial limits of the country, as accepted by ICAO.

Construction, Modification and Management of passenger terminals.

4, Development and Management of cargo terminals at international and
domestic airports.

5. Provision of passenger facilities and information system at the passenger
terminals at airports.

6. Expansion and strengthening of operation area, viz. Runways, Aprons,
Taxiway etc.

7. Provision of visual aids.

8. Provision of Communication and Navigation aids, viz. ILS, DVOR, DME,
Radar etc.

9. Provision of Air Traffic Services at Airports under it’s jurisdiction.

10, Provision of aeronautical information services publication of AIP, NOTAMS,
AIRRACS, PIBs ete.

ge

52

--- Page 33 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

CONVENTION FOR THE UNIFICATION OF CERTAIN RULES RELATING
TO INTERNATIONAL CARRIAGE BY AIR, SIGNED AT WARSAW ON 12
OCTOBER 1929 (WARSAW CONVENTION.) AND IT’S AMMENDMENTS

The Hague Protocol, 1955, The Guadalajara Convention, 1961,The Guatemala
City Protocol, 1971, additional Montreal Protocol nos. 1 to 4, 1975, and The Montreal
Convention, 1999 were held to amend the rules and for the unification of certain
provisions relating to international carriage by air signed at Warsaw on 12 October,
1929. The Montreal convention 1999 aims at replacing Warsaw convention system.
India has ratified only Warsaw Convention and Hague protocol out of the afore listed
conventions and protocols.

This Convention applies to all international carriage of persons, lu ggage or goods
performed by aircraft for reward. It applies equally to gratuitous carriage by aircraft
performed by an air transport undertaking.

This Convention does not apply to carriage performed under the terms of any
international postal Convention.

This Convention to which 152 states are party, is one of the most widely accepted
unifications of private law. It unifies legislation on:

= Documentation on the carriage of passengers, baggage, and cargo.
= The financial liability of airlines (operators).
= The question of jurisdiction, by defining the courts before which any action
may be brought,
Passenger ticket
A passenger ticket shall be issued for each flight containing:

es The place and date of issue.

= An indication of the place of departure and destination.

m The agreed stopping places, provided that the carrier may reserve the right
to alter the stopping places, and that if he exercises that right, the alteration
shall not have the effect of depriving the carriage of its international
character.

= The name and address of the carrier or carriers.

= astatement that the carriage is subject to the rules relating to the liability
established by this convention usually printed on the ticket jacket.

The absence, irregularity, or loss of the passenger ticket does not affect the
validity of the contract of carriage, which shall be subject to the rules of the convention.
If a carrier accepts a passenger without a ticket, the carrier will not be able to fall back on
the provisions of the convention that limit liability. If a carrier issues an ‘electronic’ ticket,
then the provisions of the warsaw Convention must be communicated by other means.

53

AIR REGULATIONS

Baggage check

For luggage, other than small personal objects that the passengers take
themselves, the carrier must issue a luggage ticket. The luggage ticket is made out in
duplicate, one for the passenger and the other for the carrier.

Liability of the carrier

The Treaty also imposed limitations on the liability of the operator. However,
where gross negligence can be proved, the limit of liability is removed. Currently, the
limit of liability for death of a passenger is SDR 100 000. As per Montreal convention
1999, there are no financial limits to the liability for passenger injury or death. For
damages up to 113,100 SDRs, the air carrier cannot contest claims for compensation.
Above that amount, the air carrier can defend itself against a claim by proving that it
was not negligent or otherwise at fault.

The Carriage by Air Act, 1972.

The rights and liabilities of air carriers are governed by the Carriage by Air Act,
1972 [as amended in 2009]. The Act extends to the whole of India. Consequently,
the Act is applicable to Indian citizens involved in domestic carriage by air and in
international carriage by air, irrespective of the nationality of the aircraft performing
the carriage.

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OPERATOR AND THE
PILOT REGARDING DAMAGE TO PERSONS AND GOODS
ON THE GROUND

THE CONVENTION OF ROME 1952
This convention replaced Rome convention 1933 and Brussels protocol 1938.

The convention produced uniformity in place of the differing national laws
covering the liability of the owner or operator of an aircraft that causes damage to
persons or property on the ground. In simple terms, the operator is liable for any
damage, but the liability is limited to a sum that is proportionate to the weight of the
aircraft. The Convention makes it compulsory to insure against this liability. A later
Rome Convention looked at the problems of damage caused by foreign aircraft to third
parties on the surface of the earth. The amount of compensation is limited, but carriers
are liable for damage caused to third parties. The convention does accept compulsory
recognition and execution of any foreign judgement on damage to third parties. The
1933 convention also regulated the right of arrest where an aircraft is seized in the
case of debt. India has not ratified this convention.

Montreal protocol 1978 amended Rome convention by including operator living in
another contracting state.

54

--- Page 34 ---

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

GENEVA CONVENTION 1948.

This convention protects the rights of seller for aircraft bought on Hire Purchase,
Lease or Mortgage. |

THE CAPE TOWN CONVENTION, 2001 AND THE
CAPE TOWN PROTOCOL, 2001

Convention on international interests in mobile equipment as applied to aircraft
objects to meet the particular requirements of aircraft finance and to extend the sphere
of application of the Convention to include contracts of sale of aircraft equipment; was
signed at Cape Town on 16 November 2001. Convention aims at introducing a legally
certain, effective and prompt system of enforcement that can assure and encourage
investments in Aircraft objects. India has ratified this convention and protocol in 2008.

COMMERCIAL PRACTICES AND ASSOCIATED RULES (LEASING).

AOC/AOP Air Operators Certificate/Permit, a document issued by the Authority
of a State allowing an Operator to conduct public transport flights.

Dry lease The aeroplane is operated under the AOC of the lessee (the company
leasing the aeroplane.

Wet lease The aeroplane is operated under the AOC of the lessor (the company
who let the aircraft out).

“Military aircraft” includes naval, military and air force aircraft, and every aircraft
commanded by a person in naval, military or air force service detailed for the purpose.

55

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

Which of the following is obligating for members of ICAO ?

A) ICAO shall approve the pricing of tickets on international airline connections

B) ICAO must be informed about changes in the national regulations

C) ICAO must be informed about differences from the standards in any of the
Annexes to the convention

For aircraft flying over the high seas, which rules shall be in force?

A) _ The rules established by the state of the operator of the aircraft

B) The rules established by the state(s) adjacent to the high seas over flown
C) The rules established under the Convention of international civil aviation

Annex 14 to the convention on international civil aviation contains SARPS
for:

A) _ Air Traffic Services

B) Aerodromes

C) Facilitation

The Warsaw convention and later ammendments deals with:

A) _ limitation of the operator's responsibility vis-a-vis passengers and goods
transported

B) operator's license for international scheduled aviation

C) the security system at airports

Annex 17 to the Convention of Chicago covers:
A) Aerodromes

B) Security

C)  Facilitations

The State has to notify the Council of ICAO and publish such differences

in the national AIP If a state finds that it is impracticable to comply with an

International Standard:

A) _ It shall give 45 days notice to ICAO of the differences between its own prac-
tices and the International Standard :

B) It shall give 60 days notice to ICAO of the differences between its own prac-
tices and the International Standard

C) It shall give immediate notice to ICAO of the differences between its own
practices and the International Standard

56

--- Page 35 ---

10.

11.

12.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

The international convention defining rules relative to the responsibilities of
international air carriers for the carriage of passengers, baggage and freight
is the

A) — Hague Convention

B) Warsaw Convention

C) Tokyo Convention

The ‘Standards’ contained in the Annexes to the Chicago convention are to be

considered:

A) _ binding for the member states that have not notified ICAO about a national
difference

B) advice and guidance for the aviation legislation within the member states

C) _ binding for all air line companies with international traffic

An aircraft flying over the territory of another state must:

A) _ Follow the rules of the Air of the State it is over flying, provided they follow
ICAO rules

B) Follow the rules of the Air of the State of the Operator, if registered in other
State

C) Follow the rules of the Air of the State of Registration to the extent that they
do not conflict with the rules published by the State having jurisdiction over
the territory overflown

An airplane is planning a flight that will require a technical landing in a
neighboring state. Which freedom of the air will be exercised?

A) 3rd freedom

B) 4th freedom

C) 2nd freedom

The convention of Tokyo applies to damage:

A) caused in the territory of a contracting state or in a ship or aircraft registered
there in, by an aircraft registered in the territory of another contracting state

B) _ only caused in the territory of a contracting state by any aircraft registered in
the territory of another contracting state

C) caused in the territory of a contracting state by any aircraft regardless the reg-
istration

The International Civil Organisation (ICAO) was established by the
international convention of:

A) Warsaw
B) Chicago
C) Montreal

57

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

AIR REGULATIONS

The Rome Convention and later amendments deals with:

A) Damage caused by foreign aircraft to third parties on the surface
B) offences and certain other acts committed on board aircraft

C) Regulation of transportation of dangerous goods

The convention on offences and certain acts committed on board aircraft, is:
A) _ the convention of Rome

B) the convention of Tokyo

C) the convention of Chicago

The aircraft commander, when he has reasonable grounds to believe that a
person has committed or is about to commit, on board the aircraft, an offense
against penal law

A) may not require or authorise the assistance of other crew members

B) may require the assistance of passengers to restrain such persons

C) may deliver such person to the competent authorities

if a person is injured by a part falling from an aircraft flying over the state but
registered in another state, which convention covers this?

A) Paris
B) Chicago
C) Rome

India is a signatory to THE INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANPORT AGREEMENT,
1944:?

A) Yes
B) Yes, but it does not subscribe to Technical Freedoms
Cc) No

The convention signed by the states and moved by a desire to endure
adequate compensation for persons who suffer damage caused on the
surface by foreign aircraft is :

A) _ the Paris Convention

B) the Rome Convention

C) the Warsaw Convention

Which Annex to the Chicago Convention covers dangerous goods carried in
aircraft?

A) Annex 16
B) Annex 18
C) Annex 17

58

--- Page 36 ---

20.

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND CONVENTIONS

Proposal to give effect to an international Convention in India is initiated by:
A) Ministry of Civil Aviation

B) Parliament

C) DGCA

If a Air India provides an aeroplane and complete crew for lease to Indian Air

Force (a wet lease-out situation), who is the operator of the aeroplane?

A) _ Air India provided they carry civil load only

B) _ Air India - because it is their crew flying the aero plane

C) _ Indian Air Force- providing they absolve Air India of any responsibility in the
manner in which the aeroplane is operated

What flights are protected by the Prevention of Terrorism Act?
A) _ All flights B) Private flights only C) Military flights only

The second freedom of the air is the:

A) _ right to operate a commercial passenger flight with passengers on board
between two states

B) _ right to land for a technical stop

C) right to “ cabotage” traffic, (trans-border traffic)

Which convention makes acts of violence on board, destruction of aircraft in
flight and destroying or damaging any air navigation facility punishable?

A) — The Tokyo convention

B) The Montreal convention

C) The Warsaw convention

According to which Convention may an aircraft commander impose measures
upon a person committing a crime or an offence on board the aircraft?

A) The Convention of Rome

B) The Convention of Warsaw

C) The Convention of Tokyo

‘Cabotage’ refers to:

A) domestic air services
B) anational air carrier
C) crop spraying

59

AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

SO
Pec [ate faftsafte{o}]c}] Bs

p19 [20] 21 | 22 | 23 | a | 6 | 8
ps [c{[s tajtse{tel|c] a |

60


--- Page 37 ---

5)

AIRCRAFT NATIONALITY
AND REGISTRATION MARKS

(Annex 7, Rules of the Air,1937,
CAR SECTION 2 - AIRWORTHINESS
SERIES F PART | ISSUE Il, 10th SEPT, 1998)

Introduction: Annex 7 sets out procedures for selection by ICAO Contracting
States of nationality marks from the nationality symbols included in the radio call
signs allocated to the States of Registry by the ITU. ITU has alloted symbols 4YA to
4YZ for common marks for two or more states carrying out joint operations.

It sets standards for the use of letters, numbers and other graphic symbols to be
used in the nationality and registration marks, and spells out where these characters
will be located on different types of airborne vehicles, such as lighter-than air aircraft
and heavier-than-air aircraft.

This Annex also calls for the registration of the aircraft, and provides a sample
of this certificate for use by ICAO Contracting States. This certificate must be carried
in the aircraft at all times.

Identification Plate: An aircraft shall carry an identification plate inscribed
with at least its nationality or common mark and registration mark. The plate shall be
made of fireproof metal or other fireproof material of suitable physical properties and
the identification plate shall be secured to the aircraft in a prominent position near the
main entrance or:

a) inthe case of an unmanned free balloon, affixed conspicuously to the exterior
of the payload.; and

b) in the case of a remotely piloted aircraft, secured in a prominent position
near the main entrance or compartment or affixed conspicuously to the
exterior of the aircraft if there is no main entrance or compartment.

e The registration mark shall be letters, numbers, or a combination of
letters and numbers consisting of 1 to 5 digits or characters, and shall
be that assigned by the State of Registry or common mark registering
authority.

e When letters are used for the registration mark, combinations shall
not be used which might be confused with the five-letter combinations
used in the International Code of Signals, Part II, the three-letter
combinations beginning with Q used in the Q Code, and with the

61

AIR REGULATIONS

distress signal SOS, or other similar urgent signals, for example XXX,
PAN and TTT.

MEASUREMENTS OF NATIONALITY,
COMMON AND REGISTRATION MARKS

Heavier-than-air aircraft

Wings. The height of the marks on the wings of heavier-than-air aircraft shall be at
least 50 centimetres.

Fuselage (or equivalent structure) and vertical tail surfaces. The height of the
marks on the fuselage (or equivalent structure) and on the vertical tail surfaces of
heavier-than-air aircraft shall be at least 30 centimetres. The letters and numbers in
each separate group of marks shall be of equal height.

Lighter-than-air aircraft

The height of the marks on lighter-than-air aircraft other than unmanned free balloons
shall be at least 50 centimetres. The measurements of the marks related to unmanned
free balloons shall be determined by the State of Registry, taking into account the size
of the payload to which the identification plate is affixed.

NATIONAL PROVISIONS

Certificate of Registration — The authority empowered to register aircraft
and to grant certificate of registration in India shall be the Central Government. The
certificate of registration shall include the following particulars, namely:

Type of aircraft, constructor’s number, and year of manufacture, nationality and
registration marks referred to under these rules, full name, nationality and address
of the owner, usual station of aircraft and the date of registration and the period of
validity of such registration:

Provided that in the case of a leased aircraft, the certificate of registration shall
also include the validity of the lease and the names, nationalities and addresses of the
lessor and the lessee.

Cancellation: The registration of an aircraft registered in India may be
cancelled at any time by the DGCA, if it is satisfied that —

i. Such registration is not in conformity with the provisions of rules; or

ii. The registration has been obtained by furnishing false information; or

iii. The aircraft could more suitably be registered in some other country; or

iv. The lease in respect of the aircraft, registered is not in force; or

v. The aircraft has been destroyed or permanently withdrawn from use; or

vi. It is inexpedient in the public interest that the aircraft should remain
registered in India.

vii. The Certificate of Airworthiness in respect of the aircraft has expired for a
period of five years or more..

viii. The registration of an aircraft registered in India, to which the provisions of

62

--- Page 38 ---

AIRCRAFT NATIONALITY AND REGISTRATION MARKS

the Cape Town Convention or Cape Town Protocol apply, shall be canceled
by the DGCA, as provided in the Cape Town Protocol, if an application is
received from irrevocable deregistration and export request authorisations
(IDERA) holder prior to expiry of the lease.

Register of Aircraft: A register of aircraft registered in India shall be
maintained by the Director-General and shall include the particulars as provided for
in respect of certificate of registration. Such a register shall be open to inspection by
members of the public at such times and subject to such conditions as may be specified
by the Director-General. The Register of aircraft is also available on DGCA website.

Nationality and Registration Marks, how to be affixed- The following
provisions of this rule shall have effect with respect to the marks to be borne by aircraft
registered in India-

(1) India has been allotted nationality symbols AT to AW by ITU. However we
continue to use pre-Independence nationality marks. The nationality mark
used for aircraft registered in India is the letter “VT” for civil aircraft and
“VU” for Air-Force aircraft. The nationality mark is followed by a hyphen
and a registration mark consisting of 3 letters e.g. VT-EPC or VU-AWB
in Roman character with out ornamentation. The nationality mark for
unmanned aircraft registered in India is U followed by 6 Alpha-Numeric
characters, i.e., between 0 and 9 or A and Z, e.g., UB67DFC.

(2) The nationality and registration marks

a) Shall be painted on the aircraft or shall be fixed thereto by any other
means ensuring a similar degree of permanency in the form and manner
as specified by the Director-General, from time to time;

b) Shall be inscribed together with full name and address of the registered
owner of the aircraft on the owner’s name plate in the form and manner
specified by the Director-General from time to time; and

c) Shall always be kept clean and visible.

Use of State Marks-

(1) Anaircraft shall not bear on any part ofits exterior surface any Advertisement
or any sign or lettering except those under these rules and as required or
permitted by the Director-General.

(2) The name of an aircraft and the name and emblems of the owner of the
aircraft may be displayed on the aircraft if the location, size, shape and
colour of the lettering and signs do not interfere with easy recognition of,
and are not capable of confusion with, the nationality and registration
marks of the aircraft.

(83) An aircraft other than a State aircraft shall not bear any mark or sign
prescribed for use by a State aircraft.

(4) National flags or colours may be displayed on the aircraft in such a manner
that they are distinct and are not likely to create confusion with the markings
used by military aircraft.

63

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

The registration mark shall be letters, numbers or a combination of letters
and numbers and shall be that assigned by:

A) _ The International Telecommunication Union

B) The state of registry or common mark registering authority

C) The state of registry only

The common mark shall be selected from the series of symbols included in

the radio call signs allocated:

A) _ To state of the operator

B) To the International Civil Aviation Organisation by the International
Telecommunication Union

C) To the state of registry by the International Civil Aviation Organisation

The assignment of the common mark to a common mark registration
authority will be made by:

A) _ The International Civil Aviation Organisation

B) The state of registry

C) The International Telecommunication Union

When letters are used for the registration mark combinations shall not be
used which might be confused with urgent or distress signals for example

A) XXX
B) RCC
Cc) DDD

When letters are used for the registration mark combinations shall not be
used which might be confused with

A) _ Three letters combinations used in the international code of signals

B) Four letter combinations beginning with Q

C) _ Five letter combinations used in the international code of signals

The height of the marks on the fuselage (or equivalent structure) and on the
vertical tail surfaces of heavier than air aircraft shall be.

A) Atleast 20 centimetres

B) Atleast 40 centimetres

C) Atleast 30 centimetres

The height of the marks on lighter than air aircraft other than unmanned free
balloons shall be at least .

A) 60 centimetres

B) 50 centimetres

C) 1meter

64

--- Page 39 ---

10.

11.

AIRCRAFT NATIONALITY AND REGISTRATION MARKS

When letters are used for registration mark combinations shall not be used
which might be confused with urgent signals for example

A) LLL
B) PAN
C) RCC

When letters are used for registration mark combinations shall not be used
which might be confused with urgent signals for example

A) LLL
B) TIT
c) RCC

The height of the marks under the wings of heavier than air aircraft shall be at
least

A) 50 centimetres

B) Between 40 and 50 centimetres

C) 60 centimetres

A certificate of registration is valid from the date of registration to.
A) 1 year

B) _ Till the aircraft is destroyed in an accident

C)  Tillitis cancelled by DGCA

12. Nationality marks alloted to India by ITU are:

A) Letters VT and VW, both included
B) Letters VT only
C) Letters AT to AW

13. Nationality marks used in India are:

A) Letters VT, VU and U
B) Letters VT and VU only
C) Letters AT to AW

65

ANSWERS

AIR REGULATIONS

66

--- Page 40 ---

4

RULES OF THE AIR

(Ref.: ICAO Annex 2, AIP, India and
CAR SECTION 9 — AIR SPACE AND
AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES STANDARDS
SERIES ‘C’ PART | ISSUE II.)

APPLICABILITY OF THE RULES OF THE AIR
TERRITORIAL APPLICATION OF THE RULES OF THE AIR

These rules are applicable to all aircraft flying over Indian Territory and aircraft
bearing the Indian nationality and registration marks, wherever they may be, to the
extent that they do not conflict with the rules published by the State having jurisdiction
over the territory over flown. For purposes of flight over those parts of the high
seas where a Contracting State has accepted, pursuant to a regional air navigation
agreement, the responsibility of providing air traffic services., the “appropriate ATS
authority” referred to in this chapter is the relevant authority designated by the State
responsible for providing those services.

Compliance with the Rules of the Air

The operation of an aircraft either in flight or on the movement area of an
aerodrome shall be in compliance with the general rules and, in addition, when in
flight, either with:

a) the visual flight rules, or
b) the instrument flight rules.

Note :— Local flights as may be exempted by Air Traffic Control and such training
flights of Flying Club aircraft as may be cleared by Air Traffic Control may be operated
during night in Visual Meteorological Conditions. For this purpose local flight is a
flight wholly conducted in the immediate vicinity of an aerodrome.

67

AIR REGULATIONS

Responsibility for compliance with the rules of the air
es) ibili ilot-in- mani
The pilot-in-command of an aircraft shall, whether manipulating the controls or
not, be responsible for the operation of the aircraft in accordance with the rules of the

air, except that the pilot-in-command may depart from these rules in circumstances
that render such departure absolutely necessary in the interests of safety.

Pre-flight action

Before beginning a flight, the pilot-in-command of an aircraft shall become
familiar with all available information appropriate to the intended operation. Pre-
flight action for flights away from the vicinity of an aerodrome, and for all IFR flights,
shall include a careful study of available current weather reports and forecasts, taking
into consideration fuel requirements and an alternative course of action if the flight
cannot be completed as planned.

Authority of pilot-in-command of an aircraft

The pilot-in-command of an aircraft shall have final authority as to the disposition
of the aircraft while in command.

Problematic use of psychoactive substances

No person whose function is critical to the safety of aviation (safety-sensitive
personnel) shall undertake that function while under the influence of any psychoactive
substance, by reason of which human performance is impaired. No such person shall
engage in any kind of problematic use of substances.

GENERAL RULES
PROTECTION OF PERSONS AND PROPERTY

Negligent or reckless operation of aircraft
An aircraft shall not be operated in a negligent or reckless manner so as to
endanger life or property of others.

Minimum Safe Heights

Except when necessary for take-off or landing, or except by permission from the
Director General, aircraft shall not be flown over the congested areas of cities, towns
or settlements or over an open-air assembly of persons, unless at such a height as will
permit, in the event of an emergency arising, a landing to be made without undue
haza-d to persons or property on the surface.

Notwithstanding anything contained above, the Director-General may, by order in
writing, permit, subject to such conditions and restrictions as he mey deem fit to
impose, any aircraft engaged in aerial spraying or crop dusting, mining exploration to
fly at or above such height as may be specified in the order.
Cruising Levels

The cruising levels at which a flight or a portion of a flight is to be conducted

68

--- Page 41 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

shall be in terms of:

a) flight levels, for flights at or above the lowest usable flight level or, where
applicable, above the transition altitude;

b) altitudes, for flights below the lowest usable flight level or, where applicable,
at or below the transition altitude.

Dropping or Spraying

Nothing shall be dropped or sprayed from an aircraft in flight except under
conditions prescribed in Rule 26 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 and as indicated by relevant
information, advice and/or clearance from the appropriate air traffic services unit.

Towing

No aircraft shall be towed by an aircraft. Objects other than an aircraft shall
be towed by an aircraft, in accordance with requirements prescribed by the Director
General and as indicated by relevant information, advise and/or clearance from the
appropriate Air traffic services units. Towing of Aircraft is not permitted in India.

Parachute Descents

No person shall, except in an emergency, descend by means of a parachute from
an aircraft and no person shall drop or cause or permit to be dropped from an aircraft
in flight any article, whether attached to a parachute or not, unless the descent is
made or the article is dropped in accordance with the subject to any conditions or
limitations contained in general or special order of the Central Government in writing
in that behalf. (Rule 26 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937). Parachute descent not allowed in
normal conditions.

Acrobatic Flight

No aircraft shall be flown acrobatically except under conditions as prescribed
below and as indicated by relevant information, advice and/or clearance from the
appropriate air traffic services unit.

When an aircraft is used for aerobatics -

a) it shall be flown by a licensed pilot, or if it is flown by a person for the
purpose of qualifying for a licence under these rules, such person shall be
accompanied by a licensed pilot instructor;

b) if passengers are carried, whether the carriage is public transport or not,
their previous consent to the performance of acrobatics shall be obtained in
writing;

c) the pilot or person in charge of aircraft shall satisfy himself before
commencing the flight that every person carried in the aircraft is properly
secured by safety belts; and

(d) the aerobatics shall be commenced at such a height that will permit
completion of the manoeuvre at a height of not less than 600 metres (2000
feet) above the ground or above such higher height as may be specified in
the certificate of airworthiness issued in respect of an aircraft in aerobatic
category.

69

AIR REGULATIONS

No Person shall Fly Acrobatically;

a) so as to constitute hazard to air traffic;

b) im the vicinity of an aerodrome at a distance of less than two nautical miles
from the nearest point of the perimeter of the aerodrome unless flown at
height greater than 1800 meters (6000 ft);

c) when flying over any city, town. Village site or populous area; or when
flying over any meeting for public; games or sports or other public assembly,
except where a request for such flying has been made in writing to Director
General by the promoters of such meeting and assembly.

Formation Flights
No civil aircraft shall be flown in formation in India.

Avoidance of Collisions

Nothing in these rules shall relieve the pilot-in-command of an aircraft from the
responsibility of taking such action , including collision avoidance manoeuvres based
on resolution advisories provided by ACAS equipment, as well as avert collision.

Proximity
An aircraft shall not be operated in such proximity to other aircraft as to create
a collision hazard.

Right-of-way

The aircraft that has the right-of-way shall maintain its heading and speed. An
aircraft that is obliged by the following rules to keep out of the way of another shall
avoid passing over, under or in front of the other, unless it passes well clear and takes
into account the effect of aircraft wake turbulence.

Approaching Head-on.

When two aircraft are approaching head-on or approximately so and there is
danger of collision, each shall alter its heading to the right.

Converging.
When two aircraft are converging at approximately the same level, the aircraft
that has the other on its right shall give way, except as follows:

a) power-driven heavier-than-air aircraft shall give way to airships, gliders
and balloons;

b) airships shall give way to gliders and balloons;

¢) gliders shall give way to balloons;

d) power-driven aircraft shall give way to aircraft which are seen to be towing
other aircraft or objects.

Overtaking.

An overtaking aircraft is an aircraft that approaches another from the rear on a
line forming an angle of less than 70 degrees with the plane of symmetry of the latter,
i.e. is in such a position with reference to the other aircraft that at night it should be

70

--- Page 42 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

igation lights.
; ight (starboard) navigation | ft
: aircraft's left (port) or rig vertaking aircraft,
aa aners a that is being overtaken has the yee "obo I hoop out of the way of the
An aircraft that 1s : in horizontal flight, sha hange in the
imbing, descending or in . d no subsequent chang! .
whether climbing, ee ing to the right, an . : f this
. ts heading ircraft from
other aan by tthe two aircraft shall absolve the overtaking a
relative position

obligation until it is entirely past and clear.

. Il give way to
aint ft in flight, or operating on the ground or water, shall gl
An aircraft in >

ir raft landing or in t he final stages of ana roach to land.
‘pp
aire

avier- than-alr aircr att are appr oaching an aer ‘odr ome for

: ircraft at the
yee ofl Orne airorat at the higher level shall give way to al
the purpose of lanems:

i to cut in in front of
t the latter shall not take advantage ol this ule vortake a ra
oeeth sever 7 in the final stages of an approach to 7 7 oer gliders.
Se eedislees power driven heavier-than-air aircraft shall gi
Nevertheless, =

Emergency Landing.
An aircraft that is aw
aircraft.

Taking Off. ;
An aircraft taxim:
aircraft taking off or about to take off.

SURFACE MOVEMENT OF AIRCRAFT

hg
In case 0 er 0: olli on between two & raft taxing 0: th movem
f dang f Cc Sl 1rC. ung on e ve. ent area

of an aerodrome the following shall apply:

i h shall
i rv approximately so, eac
Seren itee none he vieht so as to keep well clear;

the one which has the other

are t at another Ss compelled to land shall ve way to a

on the manoeuv ring area of an aerodrome shall give way to
g

o aircraft
» aaron where practicable alter its course to th

b) when two aircraft are on a converging course,
oa Ae i bein i ft shall have the
i i inert eich is being overtaken by another avell clear ane
) ghee king aircraft sna
i d the overtaking
right-of-way an
aircraft.

hold at all runway-
ing area shall stop and
: jing on the manoeurvring e control tower.
_ An airerals unless otherwise authorized by the aerodrom 1d at all lighted
holding posi aft taxiing on the manoeuvring area shall stop and ho
An aircraft taxi

lights ares witched off.
stop bars and may proceed. fur ther when the

LIGHTS TO BE DISPLAYED BY AIRCRAFT

From sunset to sun e or du y y b rescrl ed by
Ys ring an other period which ma! e p b
Director Gener al all aircraft m flight shall display *

71

AIR REGULATIONS

a)

anti-collision lights intended to attract attention to the aircraft; and
b)

navigation lights intended to indicate the relative path of the aircraft to

an observer and other lights shall not be displayed if they are likely to be
mistaken for these lights.

Note:— Lights fitted for other purposes, such as landing lights and airframe floodlights,
may be used in addition to the anti-collision lights specified in the Airworthiness
Technical Manual (Doc 9051 ) to enhance aircraft conspicuity.

From sunset to sunrise or during any other period prescribed by the Director
General,

a) all aircraft moving on the movement area of an aerodrome shall display

navigation lights intended to indicate the relative path of the aircraft to
an observer and other lights shall not be displayed if they are likely to be
mistaken for these lights;

b) unless stationary and otherwise adequately illuminated, all aircraft on the
movement area of an aerodrome shall display lights intended to indicate the
extremities of their structure;

c) all aircraft operating on the movement area of an aerodrome shall display
lights intended to attract attention to the aircraft; and
d) all aircraft on the movement area of an aerodrome
running shall display lights which indicate that fact.
All aircraft in flight and fitted with anti-collision lights:

Shall display such lights also outside the period specified above.
All aircraft:

whose engines are

Operating on the movement area of an

aerodrome and fitted with anti-collision
lights shall display such lights

also outside the period specified above.
A pilot shall be permitted to switch off or

reduce the intensity of any flashing
they do or are likely to:

a) adversely affect the satisfactory performance of duties; or
b) subject an outside observer to harmful dazzle.

SIMULATED INSTRUMENT FLIGHTS

An aircraft shall not be flown under

simulated instrument flight conditions
unless:

a) fully functioning dual controls are installed in the aircraft; and

b) a qualified pilot occupies a control seat to act as safety pilot for the person
who is flying under simulated instrument conditions. The safety pilot
shall have adequate vision forward and to each side of the aircraft, or a
competent observer in communication with the safety pilot shall occupy a
position in the aircraft from which the observer's field of vision adequately

supplements that of the safety pilot.

72

--- Page 43 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

OPERATION ON AND IN THE VICINITY OF AN AERODROME

An aircraft operated on or in the vicinity of an aerodrome shall, whether or not
within an aerodrome traffic zone:

a) Observe other aerodrome traffic for the purpose of avoiding collision;

b) Confirm with or avoid the pattern of traffic formed by other aircraft in
operation;

c) Make all turns to the left, when approaching for a landing and after taking
off, unless otherwise instructed;

d) Land and take off into the wind unless safety, the runway configuration, or
air traffic considerations determine that a different direction is preferable.

When an aerodrome control tower is in operation at an aerodrome the Pilot-in-
command shall also,

a) Maintain a continuous listening watch on the appropriate radio frequency
of the aerodrome control tower unless under approach control service
furnished by another Air Traffic Control unit and if this is not possible, keep
a watch for such instructions as may be issued by visual'signals, and

b) Obtain either by radio or by visual signals prior authorization for any
manoeuvre preparatory to or associated with taxiing, landing or take off.

FLIGHT PLANS
Submission of a Flight Plan

Except for flights of nano and micro remotely piloted aircraft (RPA) intending to
operate up to 50 FT (15M) AGL and 200 FT (60 M) AGL respectively in uncontrolled
airspace or enclosed premises, information pertaining to any flight undertaken in
indian airspace shall be informed to the concerned air traffic service unit.

A flight plan shall be submitted prior to operating:

a) any flight or portion thereof to be provided with air traffic control service;

b) any IFR flight within advisory airspace;

c) any flight within or into designated areas, or along designated routes, when
so required by the appropriate ATS authority to facilitate the provision of
flight information, alerting and search and rescue services;

d) any flight within or into designated areas, or along designated routes, when
so required by the appropriate ATS authority to facilitate co-ordination
with appropriate military units or with air traffic services units in adjacent
States in order to avoid the possible need for interception for the purpose of
identification;

e) any flight across International borders.

An operator shall, prior to departure ensure that, where the flight is intended to
operate on a route or in an area where an RNP/RVSM/RCP/RSP type specification is
prescribed, the aircraft has an appropriate approval, and that all conditions applying
to that approval will be satisfied.

73

AIR REGULATIONS

Submission Time for Flight Plan

Except where necessary for operational or technical reasons, the flight plans
for intended flights shall be submitted to appropriate ATS unit at least 180 minutes
(3 Hrs.) before but not earlier than 120 hrs. from Estimated Off Block Time. Flight
plans of remotely piloted aircraft (RPA) shall be submitted at least 24 hours before
estimated time of departure.

In the event of a proposed delay of 15 minutes or more to the departure time for
a flight plan when a flight plan has been previously filed, the Pilot-in-Command or his
representative will be required to notify ATC of the revised ETD. Where applicable the
flight plan should be amended or a new flight plan submitted by the Pilot-in-Command
and the old flight plan cancelled.

Completion of a Flight Plan

Whatever the purpose for which it is submitted, a flight plan shall contain
information, as applicable, on relevant items up to and including “Alternate
aerodrome(s)” regarding the whole route or the portion thereof for which the flight
plan is submitted.

Changes to a Flight Plan

All changes to a flight plan submitted for an IFR flight, or a VFR flight operated
as a controlled flight, shall be reported as soon as practicable to the appropriate air
traffic services unit. For other VFR flights, significant changes to a flight plan shall be
reported as soon as practicable to the appropriate air traffic services unit.

Information submitted prior to departure regarding fuel endurance or total
number of persons carried on board, if incorrect at time of departure, constitutes a
significant change to the flight plan and as such must be reported.

Closing a Flight Plan

Unless otherwise prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority, a report of
arrival shall be made in person, by radiotelephony or via data link at the earliest
possible moment after landing, to the appropriate air traffic services unit at the arrival
aerodrome, by any flight for which a flight plan has been submitted covering the entire
flight or the remaining portion of a flight to the destination aerodrome.

TIME

Co-ordinated Universal Time (UTC) shall be used and shall be expressed in hours
and minutes and, when required, seconds of the 24-hour day beginning at midnight.

A time check shall be obtained prior to operating a controlled flight and at such
other times during the flight as may be necessary.

Air traffic services unit clocks and other time-recording devices shall be checked
as necessary to ensure correct time to within plus or minus 30 seconds of UTC.

Wherever time is utilized in the application of data link communications, it shall
be accurate to within 1 second of UTC.

74

--- Page 44 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL SERVICE

Air Traffic Control Clearances

An air traffic control clearance shall be obtained prior to operating a controlled
flight, or a portion of a flight as a controlled flight. Such clearance shall be requested
through the submission of a flight plan to an air traffic control unit.

Adherence to Flight Plan

An aircraft shall adhere to the current flight plan or the applicable portion of a
current flight plan submitted for a controlled flight unless a request for a change has
been made and clearance obtained from the appropriate air traffic control unit.

Deviations from the current flight plan
In the event that a controlled flight deviates from its current flight plan, the
following action shall be taken:

a) Deviation from track:
If the aircraft is off track, action shall be taken forthwith to adjust the heading
of the aircraft to regain track as soon as practicable.

b) Deviation from ATC assigned Mach number/indicated airspeed:
The appropriate air traffic services unit shall be informed immediately.

c) Deviation from Mach number/true airspeed:
If the sustained Mach number/true airspeed at cruising level varies by plus or
minus Mach 0.02 or more, or plus or minus 19 km/h (10 kt) true airspeed or more
from the current flight plan, the appropriate air traffic services unit shall be so
informed.

d) Change in time estimate:

Except where ADS-C is activated and serviceable in airspace where ADS-C
services are provided, if the time estimate for the next applicable reporting point,
flight information region boundary or destination aerodrome, whichever comes
first, change in excess of two minutes from that notified to air traffic services, or
such other period of time as is prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority or on
the basis of regional air navigation agreements, the flight crew shall notify the
appropriate air traffic services unit as soon as possible .

When ADS-C services are provided and ADS-C is activated , the air traffic

services unit (ATSU) shall be informed automatically via data link whenever

changes occur beyond the threshold values stipulated by the ADS event contract

(ec) Changes Requests.

Requests for current flight plan changes shall include information as indicated

hereunder:

(1) Change of cruising level: aircraft identification; requested new cruising
level and cruising Mach number/true air- speed at this level, revised
time estimates (when applicable) at subsequent reporting points or flight

75

ATR REGULATIONS

information region boundaries.

(2) Change of Mach number/true airspeed: aircraft identification; requested
Mach number/true airspeed.

b) Change of Route:

(1) Destination unchanged: aircraft identification; flight rules; description
of new route of flight including related flight plan data beginning with the
position from which requested change of route is to commence; revised time
estimates; any other pertinent information.

(2) Destination changed: aircraft identification; flight rules; description of
revised route of flight to revised destination aerodrome including related
flight plan data, beginning with the position from which requested change
of route is to commence; revised time estimates; alternate aerodrome(s); any
other pertinent information.

Weather deterioration below the VMC. When it becomes evident that flight
in VMC in accordance with its current flight plan will not be practicable, a VFR flight
operated as a controlled flight shall:

a) request an amended clearance enabling the aircraft to continue in VMC to
destination or to an alternative aerodrome, or to leave the airspace within
which an ATC clearance is required; or

b) ifnoclearance in accordance with a) can be obtained, continue to operate in
VMC and notify the appropriate ATC unit of the action being taken either to
leave the airspace concerned or to land at the nearest suitable aerodrome; or

c) if operated within a control zone, request authorization to operate as a
special VFR flight; or

d) request clearance to operate in accordance with the instrument flight rules.

POSITION REPORTS

Unless exempted by the appropriate ATS authority or by the appropriate air
traffic services unit under conditions specified by that authority, a controlled flight
shall report to the appropriate air traffic services unit, as soon as possible, the time
and level of passing each designated compulsory reporting point, together with any
other required information. Position reports shall similarly be made in relation to
additional points when requested by the appropriate air traffic services unit.

COMMUNICATIONS

An aircraft operated as a controlled flight shall maintain continuous air-ground
voice communication watch on the appropriate communication channel and establish
two-way communication as necessary with, the appropriate air traffic control unit,
except as may be prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority in respect of aircraft
forming part of aerodrome traffic at a controlled aerodrome.

SELCAL or similar automatic signalling devices satisfy the requirement to
maintain an air-ground voice communication watch.

76

--- Page 45 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

The requirement for an aircraft to maintain air-ground voice communication
watch remains in effect after CPDLC has been established.

Radio Communication Failure procedures for airports where specific
RCF procedures have not been promulgated. RCF procedures are generally
promulgated at airports. In other cases, the procedures to be followed are explained in
detail in AIP, India. Some salient features of procedures are covered below.

If in visual Meteorological Conditions, the aircraft shall:

a) continue to fly in visual meteorological conditions; land at the nearest
suitable aerodrome; and report its arrival by the most expeditious means to
the appropriate air traffic control unit ;

b) if considered advisable, complete an IFR flight in accordance with the
provisions given below .

If in instrument meteorological conditions or when the pilot of an IFR
flight considers it inadvisable to complete the flight as per provisions for VMC, the
aircraft shall:

a) unless otherwise prescribed on the basis of regional air navigation agreement,
in airspace where radar is not used in the provision of air traffic control,
maintain the last assigned speed and level, or minimum flight altitude if
higher, for a period of 20 minutes following the aircraft’s failure to report its
position over a compulsory reporting point and thereafter adjust level and
speed in accordance with the filed flight plan;

b) in airspace where radar is used in the provision of air traffic control,
maintain the last assigned speed and level, or minimum flight altitude if
higher, for a period of 7 minutes following:

1) the time the last assigned level or minimum flight altitude is reached;
or

2) the time the transponder is set to Code 7600; or

3) the aircraft’s failure to report its position over a compulsory reporting
point; whichever is later, and thereafter adjust level and speed in
accordance with the filed flight plan.

c) when being radar vectored or having been directed by ATC to proceed
offset using area navigation (RNAV) without a specified limit, rejoin the
current flight plan route no later than the next significant point, taking into
consideration the applicable minimum flight altitude;

d) proceed according to the current flight plan route to the appropriate
designated navigation aid or fix serving the destination aerodrome and,
when required to ensure compliance with e) below, hold over this aid or fix
until commencement of descent;

e) commence descent from the navigation aid or fix specified in d) at, or as close
as possible to, the expected approach time last received and acknowledged;
or, if no expected approach time has been received and acknowledged, at,
or as close as possible to, the estimated time of arrival resulting from the

77

AIR REGULATIONS

current flight plan;

f) complete a normal instrument approach procedure as specified for the
designated navigation aid or fix; and

g) land, if possible, within thirty minutes after the estimated time of arrival
specified in e) or the last acknowledged expected approach time, whichever
is later.

Note:— The provision of air traffic control service to other flights operating in the airspace
concerned will be based on the premise that an aircraft experiencing communication
failure will comply with these rules.

VMC visibility and distance from cloud minima
Table 3-1* (see 4.1)

Airspace Flight
class visibility

Distance for
cloud

Altitude band

At and above 3 050 m A*** 8Km 1500 m horizontally

(10 000 ft) AMSL BCDEFG 300 M (1 000 ft)
vertically

Below 3 050m (10 000 A*** 1500 m horizontally

ft) AMSL and above BCDEFG 800 M (1 000 ft)

900 m (3 000 ft) AMSL, vertically

or above 300 m

(1 000 ft) above terrain,

whichever is the higher

At and below 900 m A***BCDE 1500 m horizontally

(3000 ft) AMSL, or 800 m (1000 ft)

m (1000 ft) above vertically

Clear of cloud and with
the surface in sight.

terrain, whichever is FG

the higher

* When the height of the transition altitude is lower than 3 050 m (10 000 ft) AMSL,
FL 100 should be used in lieu of 10 000 ft.

** When so prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority:
a) flight visibilities reduced to not less than 3 000 m may be permitted for flights operating:
1) at speeds that, in the prevailing visibility, will give adequate opportunity to observe
other traffic or any obstacles in time to avoid collision; or

2) in circumstances in which the probability of encounters with other traffic would
normally be low, e.g. in areas of low volume traffic and for aerial work at low levels.

b) HELICOPTERS may be permitted to operate upto 1500 m flight visibility, if manoeuvred
at a speed that will give adequate opportunity to observe other traffic or any obstacles in
time to avoid collision.

*** The VMC minima in Class A airspace are included for guidance to pilots and do
not imply acceptance of VFR flights in Class A airspace.

78

--- Page 46 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

Note: For Airspace F and G in India Altitude band ‘At and below 900 m (3000 ft.) AMSL, or 300
m (1000 ft.) above terrain, whichever is the higher’, flight visibilities reduced to not less than
3000 m may be permitted and HELICOPTERS may be permitted to operate upto 1000 m flight
visibility.

VISUAL FLIGHT RULES

Except when operating as a special VFR flight, VFR flights shall be conducted
so that the aircraft is flown in conditions of visibility and distance from clouds equal to
or greater than those specified in Table.

Except when a clearance is obtained from an air traffic control unit, VFR flights
shall not take off or land at an aerodrome within a control zone, or enter the aerodrome
traffic zone or traffic pattern:

a) when the ceiling is less than 450 m (1 500 ft); or

b) when the ground visibility is less than 5 km.

VFR flights shall be operated during the period from 20 minutes before sunrise
to 20 minutes after sunset, except when exempted by air traffic control for local flights
and such training flights of flying club aircraft as may be cleared by air traffic control.
Local flight is a flight wholly conducted in the immediate vicinity of an aerodrome.

Unless authorized by the appropriate ATS authority, VFR flights shall not be operated:
a) above FL150.
b) at transonic and supersonic speeds.
c) more than 100NM seaward from the shoreline within controlled airspace.

Authorization for VFR flights to operate above FL 290 shall not be granted in
areas where a vertical separation minimum of 300 m (1000 ft) is applied above FL 290.

Except when necessary for take-off or landing, or except by permission from the
Director General, a VFR flight shall not be flown:

a) over the congested areas of cities, towns or settlements or over an open air
assembly of persons at a height less than 300 m (1000 ft) above the highest
obstacle within a radius of 600 m from the aircraft;

b) elsewhere, at a height less than 150 m (500 ft) above the ground or water.

Except where otherwise indicated in air traffic control clearances or specified
by the appropriate ATS authority, VFR flights in level cruising flight when operated
above 900 m (3000 ft) from the ground or water, or a higher datum as specified by the
appropriate ATS authority, shall be conducted at a cruising level appropriate to the
track as specified in the Tables of cruising levels.

VFR flights shall comply with Air Traffic Control provisions:
a) when operated within Class B, C and D airspace;
b) when forming part of aerodrome traffic at controlled aerodromes; or
c) when operated as special VFR flights.

A VFR flight operating within or into areas, or along routes, designated by the

79

AIR REGULATIONS

appropriate ATS authority shall maintain continuous air-ground voice communication
watch on the appropriate communication channel of, and report its position as
necessary to, the air traffic services unit providing flight information service.

An aircraft operated in accordance with the visual flight rules which wishes to
change to compliance with the instrument flight rules shall:

a) if flight plan was submitted, communicate the necessary changes to be
effected to its current flight plan, or

b) when so required, submit a flight plan to the appropriate air traffic services unit and
obtain a clearance prior to proceeding IFR when in controlled airspace.

SPECIAL VFR FLIGHTS

a) When traffic conditions permit, special VFR flights may be authorised
subject to the approval from the unit providing approach control service.

b) Requests for such authorisation shall be handled individually.

c) When the ground visibility is not less than 1500 meters, special VFR flights
may be authorised to enter a control zone for the purpose of landing, to
take-off and depart from a control zone, to cross a control zone, or to operate
locally within a control zone.

d) Provided that performance Class I and performance Class II helicopters
may be authorised to operate special VFR flights when the ground visibility is not
less than 1000 metres.

e) Pilot shall be responsible for meeting the criteria for performance Class I and
performance Class II helicopters and should state this in field 18 of the Flight plan
and report on RTF to appropriate ATC unit.

f) Special VFR flights shall be operated only by pilots holding instrument rating,
Assistant Fight Instructor rating or Flight Instructor rating.

INSTRUMENT FLIGHT RULES

RULES APPLICABLE TO ALL IFR FLIGHTS

Aircraft Equipment

Aircraft shall be equipped with suitable instruments and with navigation
equipment appropriate to the route to be flown.
Minimum Levels

Except when necessary for take-off or landing, or except when specifically
authorized by the Director General, an IFR flight shall be flown at a level which is
not below the minimum flight altitude established by the State whose territory is
overflown, or, where no such minimum flight altitude has been established:

a) over high terrain or in mountainous areas, at a level which is at least 600
m (2000 ft) above the highest obstacle located within 8 km of the estimated
position of the aircraft;

80

--- Page 47 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

b) elsewhere than as specified in a), at a level which is at least 300m (1000 ft)
above the highest obstacle located within 8 km of the estimated position of
the aircraft.

Change from IFR flight to VFR flight ;

An aircraft electing to change the conduct of its flight from compliance with
the instrument flight rules to compliance with the visual flight rules shall, if a flight
plan was submitted, notify the appropriate air traffic services unit specifically that the
IFR flight is cancelled and communicate thereto the changes to be made to its current
flight plan. When an aircraft operating under the instrument flight rules is flown in or
encounters visual meteorological conditions it shall not cancel its IFR flight unless it
is anticipated, and intended, that the flight will be continued for a reasonable period of
time in uninterrupted visual meteorological conditions.

Rules applicable to IFR flights within controlled airspace. IFR flights
shall comply with these provisions when operated in controlled airspace.

An IFR flight operating in cruising flight in controlled airspace shall be flown at
a cruising level, or, if authorized to employ cruise climb techniques, between two levels
or above a level, selected from:

a) the Tables of cruising levels, or

b) a modified table of cruising levels, when so prescribed for flight above FL
410, except that the correlation of levels to track prescribed therein shall
not apply whenever otherwise indicated in air traffic control clearances or
specified by the appropriate ATS authority in Aeronautical Information
Publications.

RULES APPLICABLE TO IFR FLIGHTS OUTSIDE CONTROLLED AIRSPACE

Cruising Levels

An IFR flight operating in level cruising flight outside of controlled airspace
shall be flown at a cruising level appropriate to its track as specified in:

a) the Tables of cruising levels, except when otherwise specified by the
appropriate ATS authority for flight at or below 900 m (8000 ft) above mean
sea level; or

b) a modified table of cruising levels, when so prescribed for flight above FL 410.

Communications

An IFR flight operating outside controlled airspace but within or into areas,
or along routes, designated by the appropriate ATS authority shall maintain an air-
ground voice communication watch on the appropriate communication channel and
establish two-way communication, as necessary, with the air traffic services unit
providing flight information service.

81

AIR REGULATIONS

Position Reports
An IFR flight operating outside controlled airspace and required by the
appropriate ATS authority to:

— submit a flight plan,

— maintain an air-ground voice communication watch on the appropriate
communication channel and establish two-way communication, as necessary,
with the air traffic services unit providing flight information service, shall
report position as specified for controlled flights.

Aircraft electing to use the air traffic advisory service whilst operating IFR
within specified advisory airspace are expected to comply with these provisions, except
that the flight plan and changes thereto are not subjected to clearances and that two
-way communication will be maintained with the unit providing the air traffic advisory
service.

Flight by Night. A flight performed between half an hour after sunset and half an
hour before sunrise.

SIGNALS

Upon observing or receiving any of the signals given below , aircraft shall take
such action as may be required by the interpretation of the signal given..

No person shall guide an aircraft unless trained, qualified and approved by the
DGCA to carry out the functions of a signalman.

The signalman shall wear a distinctive fluorescent identification vest to allow
the flight crew to identify that he or she is the person responsible for the marshalling
operation.

Daylight fluorescent-coloured wands, table-tennis bats or gloves shall be used
for all signalling by all participating ground staff during daylight hours.

Illuminated wands shall be used at night or in low visibility.

DISTRESS AND URGENCY SIGNALS

Note 1:— None of the provisions in this section shall prevent the use, by an aircraft in
distress, of any means at its disposal to attract attention, make known its position and

obtain help.

Distress Signals
The following signals, used either together or separately, mean that grave and
imminent danger threatens, and immediate assistance is requested:

a) a signal made by radiotelegraphy or by any other signalling method
consisting of the group SOS (...___...in the Morse Code);

b) aradiotelephony distress signal consisting of the spoken word MAYDAY;

c) adistress message sent via data link which transmits the intent of the word
MAYDAY;

82

--- Page 48 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

d) rockets or shells throwing red lights, fired one at a time at short intervals;
e) aparachute flare showing a red light.

Urgency Signals
The following signals, used either together or separately, mean that an aircraft
‘ wishes to give notice of difficulties which compel it to land without requiring immediate
assistance:

a) the repeated switching on and off of the landing lights; or
b) the repeated switching on and off of the navigation lights in such manner as
to be distinct from flashing navigation lights.

The following signals, used either together or separately, mean that an aircraft
has a very urgent message to transmit concerning the safety of a ship, aircraft or other
vehicle, or of some person on board or within sight:

a) a signal made by radiotelegraphy or by any other signalling method
consisting of the group X,X,X;(_.._,_..-_,_.._)}

b) aradiotelephony urgency signal consisting of the spoken words PAN, PAN;

c) an urgency message sent via data link which transmits the intent of the
words PAN, PAN.

Establishment of Air Defense Identification Zone and procedures. Air
Defense Identification Zones (A.D.I.Z) as indicated here have been established for air
defense clearance: A.D.I.Z North, South, East, West, Central and sub ADIZ South East.

Procedures for the issue of Air Defense Clearance (ADC):

Except the local flights conducted within airspace of 5NM radius centered at
ARP and vertical limits of 1000ft.AGL of an aerodrome; aircraft when operating to,
through or within the ADIZ shall obtain Air Defense Clearance before take off, through
the ATC concerned.

» ADC shall be valid for the entire route, irrespective of intermediate halts for
flight originating in one ADIZ/FIR and transiting through other ADIZ/FIR.

» All flights shall obtain Air Defense Clearance before entering ADIZ from
respective FIC ten minutes prior to entering Indian Airspace.

» ADC shall be obtained before departure. ADC Validity Period is minus (-) 15
minutes to plus (+) 45 minutes of EOBT in RPL/FPL or subsequent revision
of EOBT by DLA/CHG message. In the case of communication difficulty
or delay in receipt of ADC, or non-existence of communication at the place
of departure, the aircraft equipped with radio may be allowed to take off
with instructions to obtain ADC immediately after airborne from the FIC
concerned.

» Flying club aircraft intending to operate beyond immediate vicinity of an
aerodrome where no ATC is functioning may obtain ADC from the nearest
IAF ATC Unit. The IAF ATC Unit will advise the FIC concerned regarding
the movement of the Flying club aircraft.

83

AIR REGULATIONS

» Scheduled aircraft or flying club aircraft returning to the Aerodrome of
departure on the same day may be issued with Air Defense Clearance for
return flight also, if so desired, provided that a fresh ADC will have to be
obtained in the event of the delay for more than thirty minutes in excess of
the estimated departure time for the return flight.

INTERCEPTION

As soon as an air traffic services unit learns that an aircraft is being intercepted
in its area of responsibility, it shall take such of the following steps as are appropriate
in the circumstances:

a) attempt to establish two-way communication with the intercepted aircraft
via any means available, including the emergency radio frequency 121.5
MHz, unless such communication already exists and if practicable, repeating
this call on the emergency frequency 243 MHz;

b) if equipped with SSR transponder, select Mode A, Code 7700, unless
otherwise instructed by the appropriate air traffic services unit.

c) if equipped with ADS-B or ADS-C, select the appropriate emergency
functionality, if available, unless otherwise instructed by the appropriate
air traffic services unit.

If any instructions received by radio from any sources conflict with those
given by the intercepting aircraft by visual signals, the intercepted aircraft
shall request immediate clarification while continuing to comply with the
visual instructions given by the intercepting aircraft.

If any instructions received by radio from any sources conflict with those
given by the intercepting aircraft by radio, the intercepted aircraft shall
request immediate clarification while continuing to comply with the radio
instructions given by the intercepting aircraft.

Phraseology: When an interception is being made, the intercept control unit
and the intercepting aircraft should:

a) first attempt to establish two-way communication with the intercepted
aircraft in a common language on the emergency frequency 121.5 MHz,
using the call signs “INTERCEPT CONTROL’, “INTERCEPTOR (call
sign)” and “INTERCEPTED AIRCRAFT” respectively; and

b) failing this, attempt to establish two-way-communication with the
intercepted aircraft on such other frequency or frequencies as may have
been prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority, or to establish contact
through the appropriate ATS unit(s).

If radio contact is established during interception but communication in a
common language is not possible, attempts must be made to convey instructions,
acknowledgement of instructions and essential information by using the phrases and
pronunciations in Table and transmitting each phrase twice.

84

--- Page 49 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

Phrases for use by INTERCEPTING aircraft Phrases for use by INTERCEPTED aircraft

Phrase Prominciation Meaning Phrase Prominciation Meaning

CALL SIGN KOLSA-IN What is your call sign CALLSIGN KOLSA-IN My call sign is
(call sign)2 (call sign) (call sign)

FOLLOW FOL-LO Follow me WILCO VILL-KO Understood
Will comply

DESCEND DEE-SEND Descend for landing CAN NOT KANN NOTT Unable to
comply

YOULAND YOULAAND  Landat this aerodrome | REPEAT REE-PEET Repeat your
instruction

PROCEED PRO-SEED You may procced AM LOST AM LOSST Position unknown
MAYDAY MAYDAY T am in distress

HIJACK3 HI-JACK Thave been
hijacked

LAND LAAND T request to land
(place name) _. (place name) at (place name)

DESCEND DEE-SEND T require descent

In the second column, syllables to be emphasized are underlined.

The call sign required to be given is that used in radiotelephony communications with

air traffic services units and corresponding to the aircraft identification in the flight plan.
Circumstances may not always permit, nor make desirable, the use of the phrase “HIJACK.”

SIGNALS FOR USE IN THE EVENT OF INTERCEPTION

Signals initiated by intercepting aircraft and responses by intercepted aircraft:

Intercepting Aircraft Signals Intercepted Aircraft

DAY or NIGHT — Rocking aircraft You have DAY or NIGHT — Rocking Understood,
and flashing navigational lights at been aircraft flashing navigational will comply.
irregular intervals (and landing intercepted. | lights at irregular intervals
lights in the case of a helicopter) and following.
from a position slightly above and
ahead of, and normally to the left

of, the intercepted aircraft (or to the
right if the intercepted aircraft

is a helicopter) and, after acknowled-
gement, a slow level turn, normally to
the left, (or to the right in the case of
a helicopter) on the desired heading.

Follow me.

85

AIR REGULATIONS

Intercepting Aircraft Signals Intercepted Aircraft

— ii

terrainmay require the intercepting
aircraft to reverse the positions and

You may DAY or NIGHT — Rocking Understood,
proceed. the aircraft. will comply.

direction of tum give above in
Series 1.

Note 2 :- If the intercepted aircraft is
not able to keep pace with the
intercepting aircraft, the latter is
expected to fly a series of race-track
patterns and to rock the aircraft each
time it passes the intercepted aircraft.

DAY or NIGHT - An abrupt break-
away manoeuvre from the intercepted
aircraft consisting of a climbing turn
of 90 degrees or more without
crossing the line of flight of the
intercepted aircraft.

DAY or NIGHT — Lowering landing
gear (if fitted), showing steady
landing lights and overflying runway
in use or, if the intercepted aircraft is
a helicopter, overflying the helicopter
landing area. In the case of helicop-
ters, the intercepting helicopter
makes a landing approach, coming

to hover near to the landing area.

Signals initiated by intercepted aircraft and response by intercepting aircraft:

Intercepted Aircraft Signals Intercepting Aircraft

DAY or NIGHT — Raising landing Aerodrome | DAY or NIGHT — If it is Understood,
gear (if fitted) and flashing landing you have desired that the intercepted follow me.
lights while passing over runway in designated aircraft follow the intercepting
use or helicopter landing area at a is not aircraft to an altermate

height exceeding 300 m (1000 ft) but adequate aerodrome, the intercepting
not exceeding 600 m (2000 ft) in the aircraft raises its landing

case of a helicopter, at a height exceed- gear (if fitted) and uses the
ing 50 m (170 ft) but not exceeding Series 1 signals prescribed for
100 m (830 ft) above the aerodrome intercepting aircraft.
level, and continuing to circle

runway in use or helicopter landing
|cvea. If unable to flash landing

lights, flash any other lights available.

Understood,
will comply.

DAY or NIGHT — Lowering
landing gear (if fitted),
showing steady landing lights
and following the intercepting
aircraft and, if after overflying
the runway in use or
helicopter landing area,
landing is considered safe,
proceding to land.

If it is decided to release the
intercepted aircraft, the
intercepting aircraft uses the
Sejries 2 signals prescribed
for intercepting aircraft.

DAY or NIGHT — Use Series
2 signals prescribed for
intercepting aircraft.

Understood,
you may

Understood.

Cannot
comply.

DAY or NIGHT — Regular switching
on and off of all available lights but
in such a manner as to be distinct
from flashing lights.

DAY or NIGHT — irregular
flashing of all available lights.

DAY or NIGHT — Use Series Understood.
2 signals prescribed for

intercepting aircraft.

86

--- Page 50 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

VISUAL SIGNALS USED TO WARN IN OR ABOUT TO ENTER A RESTRICTED,
PROHIBITED OR DANGER AREA

By day and by night, a series of projectiles discharged from the ground at intervals
of 10 seconds, each showing, on bursting, red and green lights or stars will indicate to
an unauthorized aircraft that it is flying in or about to enter a restricted, prohibited or
danger area, and that the aircraft is to take such remedial action as may be necessary.

SIGNALS FOR AERODROME TRAFFIC

LIGHT AND PYROTECHNIC SIGNALS

Instructions from Aerodrome Control Tower to Aircraft

Aircraft in Flight Aircraft on the ground

Steady green Cleared to land Cleared for takeoff

Steady red Give way to other aircraft Stop
and continue circling

Series of green flashes | Return for landing* Cleared to taxi

Series of red flashes Aerodrome unsafe, Taxi clear of landing area
do not land in use

Series of white Land at this aerodrome Return to starting point on
flashes and proceed to apron* the aerodrome

Red pyrotechnic Notwithstanding any
previous instructions, do
not land for the time being

* Clearances to land and taxi will be given in due course.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT BY AN AIRCRAFT
a) When in flight:
G) during the hours of daylight: by rocking the aircraft’s wings;
Note:— This signal should not be expected on the base and final legs of the approach.

Gi) during the hours of darkness: by flashing on and off twice the aircraft’s
janding lights or, if not so equipped, by switching on and off twice its
navigation lights.

b) When on the ground:

G) During the hours of daylight: by moving the aircraft’s ailerons or
rudder;

Gi) During the hours of darkness: by flashing on and off twice the aircraft’s
landing lights or, if not so equipped, by switching on and off twice its
navigation lights.

87

AIR REGULATIONS

VISUAL GROUND SIGNALS

PROHIBITION OF LANDING :

A horizontal red square panel with yellow diagonals when
displayed in a signal area indicates that landings are prohibited
and that the prohibition is liable to be prolonged

Red Yellow

NEED FOR SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS WHILE APPROA-
CHING OR LANDING:

A horizontal red square panel with one yellow diagonal when
displayed in a signal area indicates Yellow that owing to the bad
state of the manoeuvring area, or for any other reason, special
precautions must be observed in approaching to land or in landing.

Yellow Red

USE OF RUNWAYS AND TAXIWAYS:

A horizontal white dumbbell when displayed in a signal
area indicates that aircraft are required to land, takeoff
and taxi on runways and taxiways only.

The same horizontal white dumbbell but with a
black bar placed perpendicular to the shaft across each
circular portion of the dumbbell when displayed in a signal
area indicates that aircraft are required to land and take
off on runways only, but other manoeuvres need not be
confined to runways and taxiways.

White Yellow

CLOSED RUNWAYS OR TAXIWAYS

Crosses of a single contrasting colour, white or yellow displayed horizontally on
runways and taxiways or parts there of indicate an area unfit for movement of aircraft.

88

--- Page 51 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

DIRECTION FOR LANDING OR TAKE OFF:

White or
Orange

Yellow

Yellow

A horizontal white or orange landing ‘T’ indicates
the direction to be used by aircraft for landing and takeoff,
which shall be in a direction parallel to the shaft of the ‘T’
towards the cross arm

Note: When used at night, the landing ‘T’ is either
illuminated or outlined in white-colored lights.

Asetoftwodigitsdisplayedvertically atorneartheaerodrome
controltowerindicatestoaircraftonthemaneuvering areathe
direction for takeoff, expressed in units of 10 degrees to the
nearest 10 degrees of the magnetic compass.

RIGHT HAND TRAFFIC

Whendisplayedinasignalarea, orhorizontallyattheendofthe
runwayorstripinuse, aright-handarrowofconspicuouscolour
indicates that turns are to be made to the right before landing
and after takeoff.

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES REPORTING OFFICE:

The letter ‘C’ displayed vertically in black against a yellow
background indicates the location of the air traffic services
reporting office.

GLIDER FLIGHTS IN OPERATION:

A double white cross displayed horizontally in the signal area
indicates thattheaero-dromeisbeingusedbyglidersandthat
glider flights are being performed.

89

AIR REGULATIONS

MARSHALLING SIGNALS

FROM A SIGNALMAN TO AN AIRCRAFT

Note 1:— These signals are designed for use by the signalman, with hands illuminated
as necessary to facilitate observation by the pilot, and facing the aircraft in a position:
a) for fixed-wing aircraft, on the left side of aircraft, where best seen by the
pilot; and
b) for helicopters, where the signalman can best be seen by the pilot.
Note 2:— The meaning of the relevant signals remains the same if bats, illuminated
wands or torch lights are held.

Note 3:— The aircraft engines are numbered, for the signalman facing the aircraft,
from right to left (i.e. No. 1 engine being the port outer engine).

Note 4:— Signals marked with an asterisk (*) are designed for use to hovering helicopters.
Note 5:— References to wands may be also read to refer to daylight fluorescent-coloured
table-tennis bats or gloves (daytime only).

Prior to using the following signals, the signalman shall ascertain that the area
within which an aircraft is to be guided is clear of objects which the aircraft, might
otherwise strike.

Note:— The design of many aircraft is such that the path of the wing tips, engines and

other extremities cannot always be monitored visually from the flight deck while the
aircraft is being manoeuvred on the ground.

. Pa 1. Wingwalker/ guide
i *e Raise right hand above head level with wand pointing up, move
iwi left hand wand pointing down toward body.
=
A ed Note:- This signal provides an indication by a person positioned at
A

1\ the aircraft wingtip, to the pilot/marshaller /pushback operator,
} \ ) that the aircraft movement on/off a parking position would be
s > unobstructed.

D
‘iW? a 2. Identify Gate

/ Raise fully extended arms straight above head with wands

pointing up.

90

--- Page 52 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

\ 3. Proceed to next signalman or as directed by tower/
. ground control.
- Point both arms upward; move and extend arms outward to side
p= of body and point with wands to direction of next signalman or
A taxi area.

Kian
Wr 4. Straight Ahead
hie f Bend extended arms at elbows and move wands up and down from
chest height to head.
i

lm 5 a). Turn left 5 b). Turn right

&
* \ (from the pilot &
» ll rom the pilots iy (from the pilots
\ ie \ point of view). f “All point of view)
f

With right arm and With right arm and
: f\ wand extended at i wand extended at
iy Y a 90° angle to body, hy ' a 90° angle to body,
} | make “come ahead” / ] \ make “come ahead”
u i signal with left hand. a signal with right
The rate of signal hand. The rate
motion indicates of signal motion
to pilot the rate of indicates to pilot the
aircraft turn. rate of aircraft turn.

6 a) Normal 6 b).

Stop Emergency
Fully extend Stop

arms and Abruptly extend
wands at a 90° arms and wands
angle to sides to top of head,
and slowly crossing wands.
move to above

head until

wands cross.

91

eo)

<"
=

AIR REGULATIONS

7 a). Set Brakes

7b). Release

Raise hand just above brakes

shoulder height with Raise hand just above
open palm. Ensuring shoulder height

eye contact with flight with hand closed in

crew, close hand into a
fist. Do not move until
receipt of thumbs up
acknowledgment from
flight crew.

a fist. Ensuring eye
contact with flight
crew, open palm.

Do not move until
receipt of “thumbs up”

acknowledgment from

flight crew.
8 a). Chocks _— oe 8 b). Chocks
Inserted a Removed
With arms and wands o*s With arms and wands
fully extended above fully extended above
head, move wands head, move wands
inward in a “jabbing” outward in a “jabbing”
motion until wands motion. Do not
touch. Ensure an remove chocks until
acknowledgment is authorised by the
received from flight flight crew.
crew.

9. Start engine(s)

Raise right arm to head level with wand pointing up and
start a circular motion with hand, at the same time with the
left arm raised above head level, point to engine to be started.

92

--- Page 53 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

Fey . 10. Cut Engines

—/ | Extend arm with wand forward of body at shoulder level; move
hand and wand to top of left shoulder and draw wand to top of
right shoulder in a slicing motion across throat.

=
Move extended arms downwards ina “patting” gesture, moving

wands up and down from waist to knees.

Be Hf oe 11. Slow Down

12. Slow down engine(s) on indicated side.

With arms down and wands toward ground, wave either right
or left wand up and down indicating engine(s) on left or right
side respectively should be slowed down.

13. Move Back

With the arms in front of the body at waist height, rotate arms

in a forward motion. To stop rearward movement, use Signals 6
a) or 6b).

98

AIR REGULATIONS

14 b). Turns
while backing -
(for tail to
port)

Point right arm
with wand down
and bring left arm
from overhead
vertical position
to horizontal
forward position, forward position,
repeating right-arm repeating left-arm
movement. movement.

14 a). Turns
while backing -
(for tail to
starboard)

Point left arm with
wand down and
bring right arm
from overhead
vertical position

to horizontal

E,

15. Affirmative/all clear

Raise right arm to head level with wand pointing up or
display hand with “thumbs up”; left arm remains at side by
knee.

Note:- This signal is also used as a technical/ servicing
communication signal.

*16. Hover
Fully extend arms and wands at a 90° angle to sides.

94

--- Page 54 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

*19 a). Move
horizontally
left

(from pilots
point of view)
Extend arm
horizontally at a
90° angle to right
side of the body.
Move other arm in
same direction in a
sweeping motion.

*20. Land

Cross arms with wands downwards and in

front of body.

*17. Move upwards

Fully extend arms and wands at a 90° angle to sides and with
palms turned up move hands upwards. Speed of movement
indicates rate of ascent.

*18. Move downwards

Fully extend arms and wands at a 90° angle to sides and with
palms turned down move hands downwards. Speed of movement
indicates rate of descen.

*19 b). Move
horizontally
right

(from pilots
point of view)
Extend arm
horizontally at a
90° angle to left
side of body. Move
other arm in same
direction in a
sweeping motion.

AIR REGULATIONS

21. Hold position/ stand-by

Fully extend arms and wands downwards at a 45° angle to
sides. Hold position until aircraft is clear for next maneuver.

22. Dispatch Aircraft

Perform a standard salute with right hand and/or wand to
dispatch the aircraft. Maintain eye contact with flight crew until
aircraft has begun to taxi.

23. Do not touch controls

(technical/ servicing communication signal)

Extend right arm fully above head and close fist or hold wand in
horizontal position; left arm remains at side by knee.

24, Connect Ground Power (technical/ servicing
communication signal)

Hold arms fully extended above head, open left hand
horizontally and move finger tips of right hand into and touch
the open palm of left hand (forming a “T”). At night, illuminated
wands can also be used to form the “T”above the head.

96

--- Page 55 ---

RULES OF THE AIR AIR REGULATIONS

STANDARD EMERGENCY HAND SIGNALS:

The following hand signals are established as the minimum required for
emergency communication between the ARFF incident commander/ARFF firefighters
and the cockpit and/or cabin crews of the incident aircraft. ARFF emergency hand
signals should be given from the left front side of the aircraft for the cockpit crew.

25. Disconnect Power (technical/servicing
communication signal)
Hold arms fully extended above head with finger tips of

right hand touching open horizontal palm of left hand Note:— In order to communicate more effectively with the cabin crew, emergency hand
(forming a “T”), then move right hand away from left. Do signals may be given by ARFF from other positions.
not disconnect power until authorised by flight crew. At
night, illuminated wands can also be used to form the “T” 1. Recommend 2. Recommended
above head. i Evacuation - , Stop -
pes } Evacuation recommended Recommend evacuation
; based on ARFF and Incident in progress be halted.
wi Wp Commander’s assessment of . Stop aircraft movement
4 M4 external situation. iA or other activity in
26. Negative (technical/servicing communication | Arm extended from body and PROBTESS.
signal) } held horizontal with hand Pe a Arms in front of head ~
Hold right arm straight out at 90° from shoulder and point ams upraised at eye level. Execute Crossed at wrists
: beckoning arm motion angled

wand down to ground or display hand with “thumbs down”, Night — same with wands

left hand remains at side by knee. backward. Non-beckoning arm

held against body.

Night — same with wands.

3. Emergency Contained

No outside evidence of dangerous conditions or “all-clear.”

27. Establish communication via interphone
Arms extended outward and down at a 45 degree angle.

(technical/servicing communication signal) ‘
Extend both arms at 90° from body and move hands to cup v4 2 Arms moved inward below waistline simultaneously until
both ears. F i 2 wrists crossed, then extended outward to starting position

(umpire’s “safe” signal).

Night — same with wands.

28. Open/close’ stairs (technical/servicing
communication signal) .

With right arm at side and left arm raised above head at

a 45° angle, move right arm in a sweeping motion towards
top of left shoulder.

4. Fire

Move right hand wand in a “fanning” motion from the
shoulder to the knee, while at the same time pointing with
the left-hand wand to the area of the fire.

Note:- This signal is intended mainly for aircraft with the
set of integral stairs at the front. aa

97 98

--- Page 56 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

From the pilot of an aircraft to a signalman:

b)

BRAKES

Brakes engaged: raise arm and hand, with fingers extended, horizontally in
front of face, then clench fist.

Brakes released: raise arm, with fist clenched, horizontally in front of face,
then extend fingers.

CHOCKS

Insert chocks: arms extended, palms outwards. move hands inwards to cross
in front of face.

Remove chocks: hands crossed in front of face, palms outwards, move arms
outwards.

99

AIR REGULATIONS

TABLE OF CRUISING LEVELS

CVSM (Conventional Vertical Separation Minimum), also called non RVSM and RVSM
(Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum). CVSM is the general vertical separation
minimum applied every where. In areas where, on the basis of regional air navigation
agreements and in accordance with conditions specified therein, a reduced vertical
separation minimum (RVSM) of 300 m (1 000 ft) is applied between FL 290 and FL 410
inclusive. RVSM is applied in Indian airspaces as per table.

The cruising levels to be observed when so required are as follows:

RVSM - FEET (USED IN INDIA)

In areas where feet are used for altitude and where, in accordance with regional
air navigation agreements, a vertical separation minimum of 1 000 ft is applied
between FL 290 and FL 410 inclusive:*

TRACK**
From 000 degrees to 179 degrees*** From 180 degrees to 359 degrees
IFR Flights VF R Flights IFR Flights VER Flights
Level Level Level Level

FL Feet Metres FL Feet Metres FL Feet Metres FL Feet Metres
010 1000 300 : - . 020 2 000 600 - - -
030 3 000 900 035 8500 1050 040 4000 1200 045 4500 1350
050 5000 16500 055 5500 1700 060 6 000 1850 065 6 500 2000
070 7000 2150 075 7500 2300 080 8 000 2 450 085 8 500 2 600
090 9000 2750 095 9500 2900 100 10 000 3050 105 10 500 3 200
110 11000 3350 115 «#11500 36500 120 12 000 3 650 125 12 500 3 800
130 13000 3950 1385 13500 4100 140 14000 4 250 145 14 600 4 400
150 15000 46550 155 15500 4700 160 16 000 4900 165 16 500 5 050
170 17000 5200 175 17500 5350 180 18 000 5 500 185 18 500 5 650
190 19000 5800 195 19500 5950 200 20 000 6 100 205 20 500 6 250
210 21000 6400 215 21500 6550 220 22 000 6 700 225 22 500 6 850
230 «23000 7000 235 23500 7150 240 24 000 7 300 245 24 500 7 450
250 25000 7600 255 25500 7750 260 26 000 7900 265 26 500 8 100
270 27000 8250 275 «27500 8 400 280 28 000 8 550 285 28 500 8 700
290 29000 8850 300 30 000 9 150
810 31000 9450 320 32 000 9 750
830 33000 10050 340 34 000 10 350
350 35000 10650 360 36 000 10 950
370 37000 11300 380 38 000 11 600
390 39000 11900 400 40 000 12 200
410 41000 12500 430 43 000 13 100
450 45000 13700 470 47 000 14 350
490 49.000 14950 510 51000 15 550

etc, etc, etc. etc,

*Except when, on the basis of regional air navigation agreements, a modified table of cruising levels based on a nominal vertical separation
minimum of 1 000 ft (300 m) is prescribed for use, under specified conditions, by aircraft operating above FL 410 within designated portions of
the airspace.

**Magnetic track, or in polar areas at latitudes higher than 70 degrees and within such extensions to those areas as may be prescribed by
the appropriate ATS authorities, grid tracks as determined by a network of lines parallel to the Greenwich Meridian superimposed on a polar
stereographic chart in which the direction towards the North Pole is employed as the Grid North.

***Except where, on the basis of regional air navigation agreements, from 090 to 269 degrees and from 270 to 089 degrees is prescribed to
accommodate predominant traffic directions and appropriate transition procedures to be associated therewith are specified.

Note:- Guidance material relating to vertical separation is contained in the Manual on Implementation of a 300 m (1 000 ft) Vertical Separation
Minimum between FL 290 and FL 410 Inclusive (Doc 9574).

100

--- Page 57 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

NON- RVSM-FEET

eee
TRACK** ~

From 000 degrees to 179 degrees** From 180 degrees to 359 degrees

IFR Flights VF R Flights IFR Flights VFR Flights
Level Level : Level

**Magnetic track, or in polar areas at latitudes higher than 70 degrees and within such extensions to those areas as may be prescribed by
the appropriate ATS authorities, grid tracks as determined by a network of lines parallel to the Greenwich Meridian superimposed on a polar
stereographic chart in which the direction towards the North Pole is employed as the Grid North.

***Except where, on the basis of regional air navigation agreements, from 090 to 269 degrees and from 270 to 089 degrees is prescribed to
accommodate predominant traffic directions and appropriate transition procedures to be associated therewith are specified,

Note:- Guidance material relating to vertical separation is contained in the Manual on Implementation of a 300 m (1 000 ft) Vertical Separation
Minimum between FL 290 and FL 410 Inclusive (Doc 9574).

101

AIR REGULATIONS

SEMI-CIRCULAR SYSTEM OF CRUISING LEVELS

(a) Upto F290 for both RVSM and CVSM
(Conventional Vertical Separation Minimum) Airspaces

(b) Above F290
(i) RVSM AIRSPACES

IFR
Odd

upto F410

IFR
Even

upto F400

+

430,470
etc.

+

450,490
etc.

102

(b) Above F290
(ii) CVSM AIRSPACES

IFR
Atemate Odd } Alternate Odd

F310, 350, F330, 370,
390, 430 410, 450
etc etc

VFR VFR

Aitemate Even
F300, 340
360, 420,

460
etc,

Alternate Even
F320, 360
400, 440 ete,


--- Page 58 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

LIGHTS TO BE DISPLAYED BY AEROPLANES

NAVIGATION LIGHTS TO BE DISPLAYED IN THE AIR

Note:— The lights specified herein are intended to meet the requirements of Annex 2 for
navigation lights.

As illustrated in Figure, the following unobstructed navigation lights shall be displayed:
a) ared light projected above and below the horizontal plane through angle of
coverage L: 110 degrees

b) a green light projected above and below the horizontal plane through angle
of coverage R: 110 degrees

c) a white light projected above and below the horizontal plane rearward
through angle of coverage A: 140 degrees

NAVIGATION LIGHTS

r
‘ :
n
4 8
RED Lire
a10° § 8 Gre
wor” mee

ery. Sa
eee WHITE 140° meee

103

AIR REGULATIONS

RIGHT OF WAY AT NIGHT

The navigation lights allow a simplification of the right of way rules at night.
If a pilot sees navigation light which is not moving relative to him, there is a risk of
collision. If the light is green, he has right of way. If the light is red, he must give
way by altering course to the right. If he sees both red and green, the other aircraft is
approaching head on and he must alter course to the right. Navigation lights on the
wings cannot be seen from the rear.

Examination question often involve positions in which lights become visible, and
require answers about correct actions to be taken. A red light seen on a pilot’s left, for
example, would not remain in the same relative position, and would require no action.
Relative bearings (360 degrees around the aircraft’s heading) may be referred to in
questions.

UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE

If the pilot-in-command cannot proceed to an aerodrome in accordance with
the rules, he/she should attempt to continue flying on the assigned track and at the
assigned cruising level at least until able to notify an ATS unit or until within radar or
ADS-B coverage.

When an aircraft subjected to an act of unlawful interference must depart from its
assigned track or its assigned cruising level without being able to make radiotelephony
contact with ATS, the pilot-in-command should, whenever possible:

a) attempt to broadcast warnings on the VHF channel in use or the VHF
emergency frequency, and other appropriate channels, unless considerations
aboard the aircraft dictate otherwise. Other equipment such as on-board
transponders and data links should also be used when it is advantageous to
do so and circumstances permit; and

b) proceed in accordance with applicable special procedures for in-flight
contingencies, where such procedures have been established and
promulgated in the Regional Supplementary Procedures (Doc 7030); or

c) if no applicable regional procedures have been established, proceed at a
level which differs from the cruising levels normally used for IFR flight by:
1) 150 m (500 ft) in an area where a vertical separation minimum of 300

m (1 000 ft) is applied; or
2) 300 m (1 000 ft) in an area where a vertical separation minimum of 600
m (2 000 ft) is applied.

104

--- Page 59 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

QUESTIONS

Where State has not established minimum IFR altitudes, the minimum height
of an aircraft above the highest obstacle over high terrain, or in mountainous
areas shall be for an IFR flight:

A) Atleast 2000ft within 8km of the estimated position

B) Atleast 1000ft within 8km of the estimated position

C) Atleast 2000ft within 5km of the estimated position

Aircraft wishing to conduct IFR flight within advisory airspace, but not electing

to use the air traffic advisory service:

A) Need to file a flight plan

B) Shall nevertheless submit a flight plan but changes made thereto are not
necessary to be notified

C) Shall nevertheless submit a and notify changes made thereto to the ATS unit
providing that service

The white dumb-bell with black perpendicular bar indicates that:

A) _ Taxiing need to be confined to the taxiways

B) _ Glider flying is performed outside the landing area

C) Landing, take-off and taxiing is allowed on runway and/or taxiway only

Your aircraft is intercepted by a military aircraft. The signals given by this
aircraft conflict with ATC instructions. You should:

A) — Select code 7500 on your transponder

B) Follow ATC instructions

C) Follow the instructions of the intercepting aircraft

An aircraft which is being subject to unlawful interference (“hijacked”) and is

forced to divert from the cleared track or cruising level without being able to

communicate with ATS shall try to:

A) _ Fly the emergency triangle

B) Continue at an altitude that differs from the semicircular rule with 1000ft when
above FL 290 and 500ft when lower than FL 290

C) As soon as possible commence emergency descent in order to minimize the
difference between cabin pressure and outside pressure

An aircraft manoeuvering in an airport’s circuit receives a series of red flashes
from the control tower. This signifies that the aircraft must:

A)  Notland for the moment regardless of previous instructions

B) — Return to land and that clearance to land will be communicated in due course
C) Notland because the airport is not available for landing

105

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

AIR REGULATIONS

Whilst flying in an aerodrome’s traffic circuit, an aircraft receives a series of
green flashes from the tower. The aircraft:

A) _ Iscleared to land

B) Must land immediately and clear the landing area

C) Must come back to land and the landing clearance will be sent in due time

Except when a clearance is obtained from an ATC unit, a VFR flight can not
enter or leave a control zone when ceiling is less than:

A) —2000ft or visibility is less than 5km

B) 1000ft or visibility is less than 5km

C)  1500ft or visibility is less than 5km

Which of the following flights has the greatest priority to land?

A) Emergency aircraft

B) Military aircraft

C) VIP (Head of state) aircraft

An aircraft flying above the sea between 4500ft MSL and 9000ft MSL outside
controlled airspace under VFR, must remain on principle at least:

A)  1500m horizontally, 1000ft vertically from clouds; 8km visibility

B) Clear of clouds and in sight of the surface; 8km visibility

C) 1500m horizontally, 1000ft vertically from clouds; 5km visibility

The VMC minima for an airspace classified as “B” above 10000ft MSL are:
A) 2000m horizontally, 1000ft vertically from clouds; 8km visibility

B) Clear of clouds; 8km visibility

C) 1 nautical mile horizontally and 1000ft vertically from clouds; 8km visibility
The VMC minima for an airspace classified as “G” above 10000ft MSL are:
A) — 1500m horizontally, 1000ft vertically from clouds; 8km visibility

B) 1 nautical mile horizontally and 1000ft vertically from clouds; 8km visibility
C) 1 nautical mile horizontally and 1000ft vertically from clouds; 5km visibility

Minimum vertical distance from cloud for VFR flight within controlled space is.
A) 1000 ft B) 500 ft C) 1000 m

Green flashes from Tower, this signal means that the aircraft:

A) May continue to taxy towards the take-off area

B) Must return to its point of departure
C) Must stop

106

--- Page 60 ---

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

RULES OF THE AIR

Which of the following actions shall be taken in case of a controlled flight
deviates from the track?

A) Adjust the heading of the aircraft to regain track as soon as possible

B) If VMC, maintain this condition, waiting for the ATC instructions

C) Notify ATC of the new track immediately and comply with instructions

An aircraft is flying under IFR in an area where the visibility is unlimited and the

sky is clear (free of clouds), when it totally loses radio communications. The
procedure to be followed is:

A) Descend to En-route Minimum Safe Altitude and join closest airfield open to

IFR operations

B) Land on the closest appropriate aerodrome, then advise Air Traffic Services of
landing

C) Continue flight onto destination, complying with last received clearances in the
filed flight plan

While taxiing an aircraft receives the following light signal from the control
tower: series of red flashes. This signal means that the aircraft:

A) Must vacate the landing area in use

B) May continue to taxi to the take-off area

C)  Muststop

An aircraft intercepted by another aircraft shall immediately attempt to
establish radio communication with the intercepting aircraft on the following
frequencies:

A) 121.5MHz- 282.8MHz

B)  121.5MHz- 125.5MHz

C) = 121.5MHz- 243MHz

If radio contact with the intercepting aircraft is established but communication
on a common language is not possible, which phrase should be pronounced
by the intercepted aircraft to communicate that he is unable to comply with the
instructions received?

A) UNABLE TO COMPLY

B) CANNOT

C) CAN NOT COMPLY

Ifradiocommunicationis established during aninterception butcommunications
in a common language is not possible, which phrase should be pronounced
by the intercepting aircraft to request the intercepted aircraft to descend for
landing?

A)  Descend for landing

B) Descend

C) You land

107

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

AIR REGULATIONS

Asignalman will ask the pilot to apply parking brakes by the following signals:

A) Arms down, palms facing inwards, moving arms from extended position
inwards

B) Crossing arms extended above his head

C) Raise arm and hand, with fingers extended, horizontally in front of body, then
clinch fist

Within uncontrolled airspace, the first usable level in IFR must provide a 500
feet margin above the following two levels:

A) 3000 feet AMSL or 1500 feet AGL

B) 3000 feet AMSL or 1000 feet AGL

C) FL30 or 1500 feet AGL

An aircraft shall display, if so equipped, an anti-collision light:

A) Outside the daylight-period at engine-start. During the daylight-period this is
not applicable

B) Onthe ground when the engines are running

C) While taxiing, but not when it is being towed

Ared flare addressed to a flying aircraft means:

A) Dangerous airfield. Do not land

B) Not withstanding any previous instructions, do not land for the time being
C) Come back and land

A double white cross displayed horizontally in the signal area means:

A)  Anarea unit for the movement of aircraft

B) Need special precautions while approaching for landing

C) The aerodrome is being used by gliders and that glider flights are being
performed

An aircraft is considered to overtake another if it approaches the other aircraft
from the rear on a line forming an angle of less than:
A) 50 degress with the plane of symmetry of the latter
B) 70 degress with the plane of symmetry of the latter
C) 60 degress with the plane of symmetry of the latter

During an IFR flight in VMC in controlled airspace you experience a two-way
radio communication failure. You will:

A) Land at the nearest suitable aerodrome maintaining VMC and inform ATC

B) Select A7600 and continue according current flightplan to destination

C) Land at the nearest suitable aerodrome and inform ATC

108

--- Page 61 ---

28.

29.

30.

31,

32.

33.

34,

35.

RULES OF THE AIR

When does FLIGHT TIME end?

A) When the aeroplane first stops after landing to disembark passengers
B) At touchdown

C) Atengine shut down when the aeroplane has stopped in the parking bay

The aerodrome at Calicut is not declared suitable for night operations. If the
sunrise is at 0550 the earliest time by which an VFR aircraft operation at the
station can take place is;

A) 0530
B) 0520
C) 0550

What is the meaning of AGL?
A) _ Altitude of ground level
B) Aerodrome ground level
C) Above ground level

Which of the following defines flight visibility?

A) _ Visibility determined in flight not obscured by cloud, dust, haze or precipitation

B) The ability to determine in the air the distance and identity of unlighted objects
by day and lighted objects by night

C) The forward visibility from the cockpit of an aircraft in flight

When operating under Special VFR clearance, the responsibility for remaining
clear of obstacles on the ground rests with:

A) Operator

B) The aircraft commander

C) Air traffic control

Who shall have the final authority over the disposition of the aircraft?

A) — The Authority

B) The Owner

C) The Commander

The commander of a public transport aircraft must ensure that passenger seat
belts are secure for:

A) _ Take-off, landing and turbulence

B) Take-off, landing, taxiing and turbulence

C) Take-off, landing, taxiing, turbulence and during emergencies

Who decides whether to fly under IFR or VFR in VMC?

A) ThePIC
B) The Operator
C)  TheATS authority

109

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

AIR REGULATIONS

An aircraft being towed by night must display:
A) The same lights that are required in flight
B) Flashing navigation lights

C) Steady navigation lights

Anti-collision lights on an aircraft must be switched on:

A) Between SS and SR or any other period specified by the appropriate authority
B) As soon as engines are running

C) All aircraft operating on the movement area

When two aircraft are approaching head on, and there is a danger of collision:
A) _ Both aircraft alter heading to port

B) Both aircraft alter course to the right (starboard side)

C) The smaller aircraft alters heading to port

A revised estimate shall be notified if the ETA destination passed by aircraft
varies by:

A) 3minutes

B) 2minutes

C) 5 minutes

An aircraft that has the right of way shall maintain its:

A) Heading and speed

B) _ Right of progress

C) Course, speed and height

On aerodromes aircraft taxiing on the manoeuvring area of an aerodrome shall
give way to:

A) — Other converging aircraft

B) Aircraft taking off or about to take off

C) Other vehicles and pedestriants

What is Special VFR?

A) A VFR procedure to enable an aeroplane to transit a control zone or area in
IMC without compliance with IFR

B) AVFR flight cleared by ATC to operate within a CTR in meteorological conditions
below VMC

C) Any flight cleared by ATC to operate in conditions less than VMC in which the
pilot is required to remain clear of cloud and in sight of the surface

110

--- Page 62 ---

43.

44,

45.

46.

47.

RULES OF THE AIR

Which is the correct order of priority:

A) _ Gliders do not give way to balloons

B) Power-driven heavier-than-air aircraft shall give way to airships, gliders and
balloons

C) Gliders shall give way to airships and balloons

What is the minimum flight altitude permitted over towns and settlements and

populated areas?

A) _ The altitude which permits the aircraft to land safely in the event of an engine
failure

B) 1000 ft above the highest obstacle within 600 m of the aircraft position

C) 500ft

A controlled flight is requested to inform the appropriate ATC unit whenever

the average True Air Speed at cruising level varies or is expected to vary from
that given in the flight plan by plus or minus:

A) 5%
B) Mach0.02
C) 10%

An aircraft operated on, or in the vicinity of, an aerodrome shall whether or not

within an ATZ:

1) Observe other aerodrome traffic for the purpose of avoiding collision

i} Conform with or avoid the pattern of traffic formed by other aircraft in
operation

lil} Make ail turns to the right, when approaching for landing or taking-off
unless otherwise instructed

IV) Land and take-off into the wind unless safety, the runway configuration,
or an air traffic consideration determines that a different direction should
be used

A) All statements except II) are correct

B) All statements except !) are correct

C) All statements except Ill) are correct

Aircraft “A” with an ATC clearance is flying in VMC conditions within a control
area. Aircraft “B” with no ATC clearance is approaching at appoximately the
same altitude and on a converging course. Which is the right of way?

A) _ Aircraft “A” regardless of the direction which “B” is approaching

B) Aircraft “B” if “A” is on its left

C) Aircraft “A” if “B” is on its right

111

48.

49,

50.

51.

52.

53.

AIR REGULATIONS

Which action shall be taken by an aircraft in the traffic pattern of an aerodrome,
experiencing radio failure to indicate difficulties which compel it to land without
requiring immediate assistance?

A) Switching on and off four times the landing lights

B) — Switching on and off three times the landing lights

C) The repeated switching on and off of the landing lights

Aircraft taxiing in the manoeuvring area must give way to:
A) _ Follow-me vehicles

B) Landing traffic

C) Departing and landing traffic

Two or more white crosses, displayed on runways and taxiways, indicate that:
A) _ The threshold has been displaced

B) The section of the runway or taxiway is unfit for aircraft movement

C) The runway or taxiway should be used with caution

During initial climb in uncontrolled airspace, the altimeter setting should be:
A) Any desired value

B) Local QNH

C) Standard pressure setting

When a controlled flight inadvertently deviates from its current flightplan, ATC
has to be informed in case:

A)  Ofanemergency

B) The estimated time is in error by more than 10 minutes

C) The TAS varies by plus or minus 5% of the TAS notified in the flightplan

Which manoeuvre shall be executed by an intercepting aircraft if the pilot

wants to communicate to the intercepted aircraft “YOU MAY PROCEED”?

A) _ Rocking wings and flashing the navigational lights

B) Executing a climbing turn of 90 degrees or more without crossing the line of
flight of the intercepted aircraft

C) Circling the intercepted aircraft in a clock-wise pattern

Semi-circular system sectors are.

A) From 000° to 179° and 180° to 359°

B) From 000° to 089°, 090° to 179°, 180° to 269° and 270° to 359°
C) From 090° to 260° and 270° to 089°

112

--- Page 63 ---

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

RULES OF THE AIR

While on IFR flight, a pilot has an emergency which causes a deviation from an

ATC clearance. What action must be taken?

A) Squawk 7700

B) The appropriate ATC unit shall be notified of the action taken as soon as
circumstances permit

C) Request an amended clearance or cancel the IFR flightplan

Outside controlled airspace above 3000’AMSL
A) Fly on 1013.2

B) QFE

C) QNH

An airborne flight plan must be submitted:

A) 30 minutes before the intended point of entry into a CTA or advisory area
B) 10 minutes before the intended point of entry into a CTA or advisory area
C) 60 minutes before the intended point of entry into a CTA or advisory area

IFR flight in VMC, weather changes to IMC:

A) Fly VMC and land at nearest convenient aerodrome.
B) _ Fly according to flight plan

C) Change to VFR plan

PIC of an aeroplane shall

A) Be responsible for safe conduct of navigation

B) Be responsible for safe conduct of flight at all times
C) All above is correct

On the ground, when two aircraft are approaching head on:

A) Both airplanes must stop or where practicable alter course to the right to keep
well clear

B) Both should declare an urgency

C) _ Traffic patrol has to be informed

No aircraft shail be flown over the congested area of cities, towns or settlements
unless at a height that will permit, In the event of an emergency a landing to be
made safely. Exceptions to this rule are:

A) Take-off and landing and permission from the appropriate authority

B) Permission from the appropriate authority

C) Take-off and landing

Which type of service is provided in Class F airspace:
A) _ Air traffic control service

B) _ Air traffic advisory service and FIS

C) _ Air traffic advisory service

113

63.

64,

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

AIR REGULATIONS

When is deviation from the rules of the air permitted?
A) Only in the interests of flight safety

B) Only when it is economically advantageous

C) Anytime the PIC thinks it is necessary

One of the following statements about aircraft ground movement is correct:
A)  Ataxing aircraft has priority over a vehicle towing an aircraft

B) Avehicle towing an aircraft has priority over a taxiing aircraft

C) Two airplanes approaching head-on will alter course to the left

While flying at night another aircraft reports that you are on his 100 degrees
relative bearing. In that case you should see his:

A) Red navigation light

B) Green navigation light

C) Green and white navigation lights

The signal from pilot to marshaller which means - brakes applied - is:

A) _ Fist clenched in front of the face then fingers extended

B) Hands crossed in front of the face, palms outwards, then move arms outwards
C) — Right arm and hand with fingers extended in front of face, then clench fist

What does a red flashing light from the control tower to an aircraft on the
manoeuvring area mean?

A) — Clear to taxi

B) Return to the start point

C) Move clear of the landing area

A series of red flashes sent to an aircraft in flight means:

A) _ Return to the airfield and land

B) Airfield is unsafe, do not land

C) Notwithstanding any other instructions do not land at the moment

A white dumbbell with a black bar spaced perpendicularly indicates

A) All aircraft are required to land, takeoff and taxi on taxiways and runways only.

B) Are required to land and takeoff on runways only

C) Awhite dumbbell when displayed requires a/c to land and takeoff and taxi on
taxiways and runways only.

A red square panel with a yellow strip along each diagonal, displayed in the
signals area of an aerodrome indicates:

A) Aerodrome is unfit for aircraft movements, and landing are prohibited

B) Exercise special care when landing

C) Land on paved surface only

114

--- Page 64 ---

71.

72.

73.

74,

75.

76.

77.

RULES OF THE AIR

Two alc of same category converging...
A) _ Both will turn to right

B) Aircraft on right will turn right

C) Aircraft on the left will give way

A signalman will ask the pilot to apply parking brakes by the following signals:

A) Raise arm and hand, with fingers extended, horizontally in front of body , then
clench fist

B) Arms down , palms facing inwards, moving arms from extended position
inwards.

C) Horizontally moving his hands, fingers extended, palms toward ground

An aircraft is foilowing a track of 179° (M) on a VFR plan. The choice of flight
levels available to the pilot are:

A) — 50,70,90,150,170,190,210,230,250,270,290

B) 55, 75, 95, 115, 135, 155, 175, 195, 215, 235, 255, 275

C)  50,70,90,110,130,160,180,200,220,240,260,280

After an aircraft has been intercepted in flight, the intercepted aircraft is rocking
its wings. This means:

A) Will comply

B) NO

C) you are not to enter this airspace

All flights above
weather Conditions

flight levels are to be cleared IFR irrespective of

A) F280
B) F150
C) F140

A flashing intermittent red light from the ground to an aircraft in the air means:
A) — Continue for another approach

B) Go-around

C) Aerodrome unsafe, do not land

When a pilot raises his arms extended palms facing outwards and moves his
hands inwards to cross in front of the face this means:

A) | Remove chocks

B) _ Insert chocks

C) Brakes released

115

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84,

AIR REGULATIONS

While taxiing, an aircraft receives from the airport controller the following light
signal: a series of green flashes. This signal means that the aircraft:

A) Must stop

B) May continue to taxi towards the take-off area

C) Must return to its point of departure

A black letter “ C” on a yellow background indicates:
A) _ The location of the control tower.

B) The location where visiting pilots should report.

C) _Rest-room facilities for visiting pilots.

At an aerodrome special VFR may be authorized when

A) _ Visibility falls below 5 km or cloud ceiling is less than 1500 feet
B) Visibility falls below 8 km or cloud ceiling is less than 1500 feet
C) _ Visibility falls below 8 km or cloud ceiling is less than 2500 feet

Aspecial VFR clearance may be obtained from ATC for the following airspaces:
A) CTR, TMAand AWY
B) CTRand TMA

C) CTR

If the sustained Mach number/true airspeed at cruising level varies by plus
or minus. true airspeed or more from the current flight plan, the
appropriate air traffic services unit shall be so informed:

A) Mach0.2

B) 5%

C) 19km/h

Ona VFR flight, your magnetic track is 005° , the magnetic heading 355° . Which
of the following flight level is correct?

A) FL70
B) FL55
C) FL60

The VMC minima for an airspace classified as “G” above 10 000 feet MSL are :
A) 1500 m horizontally and 1 000 feet vertically from clouds; 8 km visibility.

B) 1 nautical mile horizontally and 1 000 feet vertically from clouds; 5 km visibility
C) 1 nautical mile horizontally and 1000 feet vertically from clouds; 8 km visibility

116

--- Page 65 ---

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

RULES OF THE AIR

Which provisions on a VFR-flight in Class E airspace are CORRECT?

A) Service provided : Traffic Information as far as practical; ATC Clearance :
required ;

B) Service provided : Traffic Information as far as practical; ATC Clearance : not
required ;

C) Service provided : Air Traffic Control Service; ATC Clearance : required ;

Ifyou are fiying IFRin IMC conditions and you experience a total communications
failure, you should:

A) — Continue the flight according to flight plan

B) Land at the nearest suitable aerodrome and report to ATS

C) Try to contact another aircraft for relay

When flying on an airway on a heading of 255(M) the correct flight level will be:
A) Usually EVEN

B) Usually ODD

C) Always EVEN

You are outside controlled airspace on a VFR flight above 3,000ft. Your distance
from the cloud should be:

A) Clear of cloud and in sight of the surface

B) 1,000 ft vertically and 1.5 km horizontally

C) 2,000 ft and 3 NM horizontally

In areas where a separation minimum of 1000 ft. is applied up to FL 410,
authorisation for VFR flight shall not be granted above which flight level?

A) FL200
B) FL290
C) FL240

When an aircraft is operating in class F airspace below 900 m ams! the minimum
horizontal distance from cloud for VFR flight is:

A) 5km

B) 1000 ft

C) — Clear of cloud and in sight of the surface

SVFR may be authorized when the ground visibility is not less than:

A) 1500m
B) 1800m
C) 1000m

117

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

AIR REGULATIONS

Which of the following aerodrome ground signals displayed in the signals area
indicates that glider flying is in progress?

A) Awhite double cross

B) Awhite dumb-bell

C)  Ablack letter - C - on a yellow background

In areas where a vertical separation minimum (VSM) of 300 m (1000 ft) is applied
between FL 290 and FL 410 inclusive an aircraft on a magnetic track of 350
would be expected to fly at:

A) FL410
B) FL405
C) FL400

Above flight level FL 290 (non-RVSM) the vertical flight separation between
aircraft on the same direction is:

A) 3000 ft
B) 4000 ft
C) 1500 ft

Aircraft shall not be flown in formation except:

A) — Formation flying is not permitted in India for civil aircraft.
B) By pre-arrangement among the pilots taking part

C) By pre-arrangement among the PICs taking part

If the ground visibility is reported 1000 m, can a special VFR flight take off from
an aerodrome in a control zone?

A) Yes, provided the cloud ceiling is higher than 500 ft

B) No

C) Yes, provided the pilot remains in visual contact with the ground

AVER flight when flying inside an ATS airspace classified as C has to maintain

the following minima of flight visibility and distance from clouds

A) 5km at or above 3050m (10000ft) AMSL 1500m horizontal and 300m vertical
from clouds

B) 8km at or above 3050m (10000ft) AMSL, and clear of clouds

C)  8km at or above 3050m (10000ft) AMSL 1500m horizontal and 300m vertical
from clouds

118

--- Page 66 ---

RULES OF THE AIR

98. When, in airspace where VFR are permitted, the pilot in command of an IFR
flight wishes to continue his flight in accordance with visual flight rules, until
the destination is reached:

1 He must inform the control unit (“cancel IFR”)

2 He must request and obtain clearance

3 He may request his IFR flightplan to be changed to a VFR flightplan
4 The flightplan automatically becomes a VFR flightplan

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 2,4
B) 1,3
Cc) 1,4

99. in the event of a delay of a controlled flight, the submitted flightplan should be
amended or cancelled and a new flightplan submitted when the delay is:
A) 30 minutes in excess of the estimated time of departure
B) 30 minutes in excess of the estimated time off blocks
C) 60 minutes in excess of the estimated time of departure

100. Changing of flight rules from IFR to VFR is possible
A) _ If the commander so requests
B) If instructed by ATC so long as VMC is forecasted during the next 30 minutes
C) Only when leaving controlled airspace

101. ADC Validity Period is:
A) (-) 15 minutes to (+) 45 minutes of EOBT in RPL/FPL
B) (+) 60 minutes of EOBT in RPL/FPL
C) —_(-) 15 minutes to (+) 30 minutes of EOBT in RPL/FPL

102. Flight Plan is to be filed atleast?
A) One hour before EOBT
B) Three hours before EOBT
C) One hour before TOBT

103. In the event of a proposed delay of or more to the departure time for a
flight plan when a flight plan has been previously filed, the Pilot-in-Command
or his representative wil! be required to notify ATC of the revised ETD
A) 60 minutes
B) 30 minutes
C) 15 minutes

119

[es [se | e7 [88 [80 [90 | 91] 92] 93] o4[ 95 | 96 | 97 | 98 |

AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

BEB GEGoGEEEE
EEE RES Ea
Beeo go geoooErEG
See
eS
PERSE R SEE

eta tats fetefasateieyale [ele

99 |100 | 101 | 102 | 103
B A A B Cc

120

--- Page 67 ---

oD

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

(Ref: Annex 11, Doc 4444, AIP, India and
CAR SECTION 9 —- AIR SPACE AND
AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES STANDARDS
SERIES ‘E’, PART | ISSUE II)

GENERAL

Objectives of the Air Traffic Services
The objectives of the air traffic services shall be to:

a) prevent collisions between aircraft;

b) prevent collisions between aircraft on the manoeuvring area and obstructions
on that area;

c) expedite and maintain an orderly flow of air traffic;

d) provide advice and information useful for the safe and efficient conduct of
flights;

e) notify appropriate organizations regarding aircraft in need of search and
rescue aid, and assist such organizations as required.
Divisions of the Air Traffic Services:
The air traffic services shall comprise three services identified as follows.

The air traffic control service, to accomplish objectives a), b) and c) of the air traffic
services above, this service being divided in three parts as follows:

a) Area Control Service: the provision of air traffic control service for
controlled flights, except for those parts of such flights described in approach
and aerodrome control service below, in order to accomplish objectives a)
and c) of the air traffic services above;

121

AIR REGULATIONS

b) Approach Control Service: the provision of air traffic control service
for those parts of controlled flights associated with arrival or departure, in
order to accomplish objectives a) and c) of the air traffic services above;

c) Aerodrome Contro! Service: the provision of air traffic control service
for aerodrome traffic, except for those parts of flights described in approach
control service, in order to accomplish objectives a), b) and c) of the air traffic
services above.

Provisions of Control service AIP (India):

> Radio communication shall be established with the appropriate Aerodrome/
Approach Control Unit -

® Prior to taxiing for departure; or
® When intending to operate in a Class ‘C and D’ airspace.

> While operating in Class ‘C and D* airspace only direct controller-pilot
communication is permitted. RTF communication through interpreter shall
not be permitted,

> For IFR or VFR operation in Class ‘C and D’ airspace, aircraft shall be
equipped with appropriate two-way VHF radio apparatus, and a radio
compass. i

> A pilot-in-command under IFR or VFR intending to enter, cross or operate

within a CTR or ATZ shall request a Clearance from the Aerodrome/
Approach Control on the appropriate radio frequency. .

@ Heshall:-Pass the aircraft’s position, level, track and estimated time of
crossing the airspace. ,

® Maintain a continuous listening watch on that frequency while the
aircraft is within the airspace.

® Carry out any instructions received from Aerodrome /approach
Control.
The flight information service, to accomplish objective d) of the air traffic
services above.
The alerting service, to accomplish objective e) of the air traffic services above.

Designation of the portions of the airspace and controlled aerodromes where
air traffic services will be provided:

When it has been determined that air traffic services will be provided in
particular portions of the airspace or at particular aerodromes, then those portions
of the airspace or those aerodromes shall be designated in relation to the air traffic
services that are to be provided.

The designation of the particular portions of the airspace or the particular
aerodromes shall be as follows:

122

--- Page 68 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

Flight information regions. Those portions of the airspace where it is
determined that flight information service and alerting service will be provided shall
be designated as flight information regions.

Control areas and control zones. Those portions of the airspace where it
is determined that air traffic control service will be provided to IFR flights shall be
designated as control areas or control zones.

Those portions of controlled airspace where in it is determined that air traffic
control service will also be provided to VFR flights shall be designated as Classes B, C,
or D airspace.

Where designated within a flight information region, control areas and control
zones shall form part of that flight information region.

Controlled Aerodromes. Those aerodromes where it is determined that air
traffic control service will be provided to aerodrome traffic shall be designated as
controlled aerodromes.

CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION OF
ATS AIRSPACE IN INDIA

ATS airspace in India is classified and designated in accordance with the
following:

Class A*: Applicable to designated airspaces in terminal control area, control
area and control zone. IFR flights only are permitted, all flights are provided with air
traffic control service and are separated from each other.

Class B*: Applicable to designated airspaces in terminal control area, control
area and control zone. IFR and VFR flights are permitted, all flights are provided with
air traffic control service and are separated from each other.

Class C: Designated airspace within controlled airspace is classified as Class
C. IFR and VFR flights are permitted, all flights are provided with air traffic control
service and IFR flights are separated from other IFR flights and from VFR flights.
VFR flights are separated from IFR flights and receive traffic information in respect of
other VFR flights.

Class D: Airspace within controlled airspace is classified as Class D. IFR and
VFR flights are permitted and all flights are provided with air traffic control service,
IFR flights are separated from other IFR flights and receive traffic information in
respect of VFR flights, VFR flights receive traffic information in respect of all other
flights.

Class E: Airspace within ATS Route segment outside controlled airspace is
classified as Class E. IFR and VFR flights are permitted, IFR flights are provided with
air traffic control service and are separated from other IFR flights. All flights receive
traffic information as far as is practical. Class E shall not be used for control zones.

123

AIR REGULATIONS

Class F: Designated Airspace within ATS Route segment outside controlled
airspace is classified as Class F. IFR and VFR flights are permitted, all participating IFR
flights receive an air traffic advisory service and all flights receive flight information

service if requested.

Class G: Airspace outside ATS route segment and outside controlled airspace is
classified as Class G. IFR and VFR flights are permitted and receive flight information
service if requested.

The Classification of Airspace within Restricted areas shall apply only to those
portions of airspace controlled by civil ATC under Flexible Use of Airspace.

Procedures in class C airspace: Certain airspaces around airports capable
of a runway handling capacity of more than 20 aircraft per hour and equipped with
primary and secondary radars have been designated as class C airspaces. Class C
airspaces extend from 4000 feet to FL 285. Airspaces upto 30 NMs around these
airports are designated as class D airspaces. It is proposed to classify airspaces above
FL 285 as class A airspaces.
>» VFR flights intending to operate in class C airspace shall ensure that they will

be able to meet the requirements of class C (MET/COM/SPEED).

» Pre-departure clearance from appropriate ATC shall be obtained by all VFR
flights intending to enter class C airspace.

>» Aircraft on SID/STAR shall follow published speed restrictions

» All aircraft shall follow any additional speed restrictions when instructed by
ATC

>» The responsibility of terrain clearance remains with the flight crew of VFR flight
at all times

>» VFR flights unable to adhere to ATC clearance shall obtain alternate clearance.

Note: Where the ATS airspaces adjoin vertically, i.e. one above the other, flights at

a common level would comply with requirements of, and be given services applicable

to, the less restrictive class of airspace. In applying these criteria, Class B airspace
is therefore considered less restrictive than Class A airspace; Class C airspace less

restrictive than Class B airspace, etc.

124

--- Page 69 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

ATS AIRSPACE CLASSES
_SERVICES PROVIDED AND FLIGHT REQUIREMENTS

"| Type Separation Service Speed Radio Subject to
provided provided limitation** communication ATC
malt requirement clearance
aoe Bees coialeer “ =e —
only

FR | Air traffic control service Not —— Continuous two-way

IFR from IFR_ | Air traffic control service Not applicable Continuous two-way | Yes
IFR from VFR

VFR from IFR | 1. Air traffic control service 250 kt IAS below | Continuous two-way | Yes
for separation from IFR; 3050m (10,000 ft)
2. VFR/VFR traffic informa- | AMSL
tion (and traffic avoidance
advice on request)

250 kt IAS below
3050m (10,000 ft)
AMSL

IFR from IFR Continuous two-way

Air traffic control service
including traffic
information about VFR
flights (and traffic avoidance

advice on request)

TFR/VFR and VFR/VFR
traffic information (and
traffic avoidance advice on
request

250 kt IAS below
3050m (10,000 ft)
AMSL

Continuous two-way

250 kt IAS below
3050m (10,000ft) | Continuous two-way
AMSL

IFR from IFR | Air traffic control services
and, as far as practical,
traffic information about

VFR flights

Traffic information as far
as practical

250kt LAS
below
3050m (10,000ft)
AMSL

IFR from IFR | Air traffic advisory 250kt IAS below Continuous two-way | Yes
as far as service; flight information 3050m (10,000ft)
practicable service AMSL
VFR | Nil Flight information 250kt IAS below | No No
3050m (10,000ft)
AMSL
IFR | Nil Flight information service 250kt IAS below | Continuous two-way | No
3050m (10,000ft)
AMSL
VFR | Nil Flight information service 250kt LAS below
3050m (10,000ft)
AMSL No

* Implementation of Class A & Class B Airspace under consideration
** When the height of the transition altitude is lower than 3600 m (10000 ft) AMSL, FL 100 should be used in lieu of 10000 ft

125

AIR REGULATIONS

Establishment and designation of the units providing Air Traffic
Services: The air traffic services shall be provided by units established and designated

as follows:

Flight information regions: Flight Information Centers shall be established
to provide flight information and alerting services outside controlled airspaces. Flight
information regions shall be delineated to cover the whole of the air route structure to
be served by such regions.

Flight information region shall include all airspace within its lateral limits,
except as limited by an upper flight information region.

FIRs and Location Indicators :

A four-letter code group formulated in accordance with the rules prepared by
ICAO and assigned to the location of an aeronautical fixed station. ICAO has divided
the whole world into non-overlapping 22 AFSRA. Each AFSRA is assigned a separate
identifying alphabet. An AFSRA consists of number of states/countries, in some cases
one AFSRA is consisting of only one country/state.

Location indicators are assigned by States and are supervised by ICAO by
checking their conformity of with the “Formulation and Assignment of Location
Indicators” set out below.

The formation is as under:

First alphabet identifies the AFSRA

Second alphabet identifies the State / Country

Third and fourth alphabets identify the place / station

Examples:
VIDP V......AFSRA, A,E.L0...... INDIAN FIR DP......Delhi

OPKC O...... AFSRA, P......Pakistan KC...... Karachi
OAKB O......AFSRA, A......Afganistan KB...... Kabul

The second alphabet assigned to India are I,E,A,O. Indian FIRs are alloted
Alphabets as follows:

Bombay FIR (Western India) is identified by “A”
Calcutta FIR (Eastern India) “E”

Guwahati sub FIR (Eastern India) “E”

Delhi FIR (Northern India) is identified by “T’
Madras FIR (Southern India) is identified by “O”

126

--- Page 70 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

Indicators: Following Indicators are used in aeronautical charts:

() NDB is represented by generally two and sometimes three capital letters.
a SP represents Sarsawa NDB, JG Dehradun NDB, DBR Dibrugarh
ete.

(i) VOR is represented by three capital letters Examples Agartala VOR (AAT),
Mumbai VOR (BBB) etc.

(ii) ILS is represented by four capital letters,starting with “I” Examples, IGHT
Guwahati ILS RW 02, ILUC Lucknow ILS 27 etc.

(iv) Aerodrome is represented by four capital letters Example Amsterdam EHAM,
Lisbon LPPT. Indian aerodromes start with AFSARA V followed by FIR indicator
and two letter aerodrome designator,eg, Mumbai VABB, Madras VOMM etc.

(v) Significant point is represented by five capital letters inclusive of two vowels
Example GOLEM, IDOLA

(vi) Routes will have at least one alphabet and a number from one to 999. Example
A791, B209. This may be pre-fixed and suffixed by another letter. Domestic
routes in India start with letter W. Example W 49. Route designators A,B,G,R
ana W are pronounced by the names of colours, ie, Amber, Blue, Green, Red and

ite.

(vii) SIDs and STARs start with NDB/VOR/Significant point indicators followed by
a number and may have an alphabet suffixed. Example LETPU 1D Departure,
SSB 1A Arrival.

(viii) Prohibited, Restricted and Danger Areas:
Identification:
The identification shall be composed of a group of letters and figures as follows:
a) nationality letters for location indicators assigned to the State or territory
which has established the airspace;
b) a letter P for prohibited area, R for restricted area and D for danger area as
appropriate; and
ce) anumber, unduplicated within the State or territory concerned.
Prohibited Areas:

_ An airspace of defined dimensions above the land areas or territorial waters of
India within which the flights are not permitted at any time under any circumstances.
VA(P)-2, indicates Prohibited Area No. 2 in Mumbai FIR.

Restricted Areas:

An airspace of defined dimensions above the land areas or territorial waters of
India within which the flight of aircraft is restricted. VO(R)-81, is Restricted Area No.
81 in Chennai FIR.

127

AIR REGULATIONS

Danger Area:

An airspace of defined dimensions within which activities dangerous to the flight
of aircraft exist at the specified times. Such times are notified by NOTAM’s. The effect
of the the notification of the Danger Area is to caution aircraft operators/pilots that it
is necessary for them to avoid it for the safety of the aircraft when the areas are active.
VE(D)-72, indicates Danger Area No. 72 in Calcutta FIR.

Military Exercise and Training Areas

Temporary Segregated Area (TSA). Temporary Segregated Area (TSA) is an
airspace temporarily segregated and allocated for the exclusive use of a particular user
during a determined period of time and through which other traffic will not be allowed
to transit. TSA is identified by alphabets ‘TSA’, followed by a number between 501 and
999 and then, after a space, followed by the name of the place associated with the area
within square parentheses. If there are multiple areas established as parts of a general
area, the number in the identifier should be followed by an alphabet in capital case
within round parentheses. E.g. TSA801(A) [Thanjavur]

Temporary Reserved Area (TRA). Temporary Reserved Area (TRA) is an
airspace temporarily reserved and allocated for the specific use of a particular user
during a determined period of time and through which other traffic may be allowed
to transit under air traffic control (ATC) clearance. TRA is identified by alphabets
‘TRA’, followed by a number between 501 and 999 and then, after a space, followed
by the name of the place associated with the area within square parentheses. If there
are multiple areas established as parts of a general area, the number in the identifier
should be followed by an alphabet in capital case within round parentheses. E.g.
TRAG601(A) [Panagarh]

A single series of number between 501 and 999 is used for both the areas,
regardless of type.

A number is not duplicated in any type of above areas. The allocation of the
numerical part of the designator will be as under:

Areas in Mumbai FIR: A number between 501 and 600

Areas in Kolkata FIR: A number between 601 and 700

Areas in Delhi FIR: A number between 701 and 800

Areas in Chennai FIR: A number between 801 and 900

Reserved for Future Use: Numbers between 901 and 999

LOCAL/TRAINING FLIGHTS

For local training or test flights conducted by scheduled/non-scheduled operators,
a flight plan shall be submitted as for non-scheduled flights.

For training flights conducted by flying clubs within aerodrome traffic zone, a
flight plan may be submitted by Fax on ICAO model flight plan or on telephone.

128

--- Page 71 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

Note:— On aerodromes where no aerodrome traffic zone is established or no airspace
has been reserved for local flying, an area of 5 NM radius aerodrome reference point
and vertical limits up to 3000 ft AGL shall be treated as the vicinity of aerodrome for
VFR flights.

Flight plans for cross-country flights conducted by flying club and general
aviation aircraft from airfields where ATS reporting office does not exist, shall be
submitted to the FIC by Fax on ICAO model flight plan or on phone. A flight plan shall
include accumulated elapsed times to FIR boundary points wherever applicable along
with contact telephone/mobile number of pilot in command in field 18.

Control areas including, inter alia, airways and terminal control areas shall
be delineated so as to encompass sufficient airspace to contain the flight paths of those
IFR flights or portions thereof to which it is desired to provide the applicable parts of
the air traffic control service, taking into account the capabilities of the navigation aids
normally used in that area.

A lower limit of a control area shall be established at a height above the ground
or water of not less than 200 m (700 ft).

Flight Information Regions or Control Areas in the upper Airspace

Where it is desirable to limit the number of flight information regions or control
areas through which high flying aircraft would otherwise have to operate, a flight
information region or control area, as appropriate, shall be delineated to include the
upper airspace within the lateral limits of a number of lower flight information regions
or control areas.

Control Zones The lateral limits of control zones shall encompass at least those
portions of the airspace, which are not within control areas, containing the paths of
IFR flights arriving at and departing from aerodromes to be used under instrument
meteorological conditions.

Note:— Aircraft holding in the vicinity of aerodromes are considered as arriving aircraft.

The lateral limits of a control zone shall extend to at least 9.3 km (6NM) from
the centre of the aerodrome or aerodromes concerned in the directions from which
approaches may be made.

Note:— A control zone may include two or more aerodromes situated close together.

Identification of air traffic services units and airspaces An area control
centre or flight information centre shall be identified by the name of a nearby town or
city or geographic feature.

An aerodrome control tower or approach control unit shall be identified by the
name of the aerodrome at which it is located.

Acontrol zone, control area or flight information region shall be identified by the
name of the unit having jurisdiction over such airspace.

129

AIR REGULATIONS

Service to aircraft in the event of an emergency. An aircraft known
or believed to be in a state of emergency, including being subjected to unlawful
interference, shall be given maximum consideration, assistance and priority over other
aircraft as may be necessitated by the circumstances.

Note:— To indicate that it is in a state of emergency, an aircraft equipped with an
appropriate data link capability and/ or an SSR transponder might operate the
equipment as follows:

a) on Mode A, Code 77 00; or

b) on Mode A, Code 75 00 , to indicate specifically that it is being subjected to
unlawful interference; or

¢) activate the appropriate emergency and/or urgency capability of ADS; or

d) transmit the appropriate emergency message via CPDL C.

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL SERVICE
Application Air traffic control service shall be provided:
a) to all IFR flights in airspace Classes A, B, C, D and E;
b) _ to all VFR flights in airspace Classes B, C and D;
Cc) to all special VFR flights;
d) to all aerodrome traffic at controlled aerodromes.

Provision of air traffic control service
The parts of air traffic control service described shall be provided by the various units
as follows:
a) Area Control Service:
1) by an area control centre; or

2) by the unit providing approach control service in a control zone or in a
control area of limited extent which is designated primarily for the
provision of approach control service and where no area control centre is
established.

b) Approach Control Service:

1) _ by an aerodrome control tower or area control centre when it is necessary
or desirable to combine under the responsibility of one unit the functions
of the approach control service with those of the aerodrome control service
or the area control service;

2) by an approach control unit when it is necessary or desirable to establish
a separate unit.

130

--- Page 72 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

c) Aerodrome Control Service: by an aerodrome control tower.

The task of providing specified services on the apron, e.g. apron management
service, may be assigned to an aerodrome control tower or to a separate unit.

Operation of Air Traffic Control] Service Clearances issued by air traffic control
units shall provide separation:

a) between all flights in airspace Classes A and B;

b) between IFR flights in airspace Classes C, D and E;

c) between IFR flights and VFR flights in airspace Class C;

d) between IFR flights and special VFR flights;

e) between special VFR flights when so prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority.

Separation Minima The selection of separation minima for application within
a given portion of airspace shall be as per the separation minima selected from those
prescribed by the provisions of the PANS-ATM and the Regional Supplementary
Procedures.

Read-back of clearances and safety-related information The flight crew
shall read back to the air traffic controller safety-related parts of ATC clearances and
instructions which are transmitted by voice. The following items shall always be read
back:

a) ATC route clearances;

b) clearances and instructions to enter, land on, take off from, hold short of, cross
and backtrack on any runway; and

c) runway-in-use, altimeter settings, SSR codes, level instructions, heading and
speed instructions and, whether issued by the controller or contained in ATIS
broadcasts, transition levels.

The controller shall listen to the read-back to ascertain that the clearance
or instruction has been correctly acknowledged by the flight crew and shall take
immediate action to correct any discrepancies revealed by the read-back.

Voice read-back of CPDLC messages shall not be required.

Air Traffic Flow Management. ATFM is primarily meant to address the
balancing of demand against the capacity to achieve optimum utilization of the major
resources viz., Airport, Airspace and aircraft at every Indian airport where there is a
capacity constraint.

Airports Authority of India (AAI) has established a Central Air Traffic Flow
Management (C-ATFM) system in India. The C-ATFM network consist of a Central
Command Center (CCC) at Delhi supported by Flow Management Positions (FMPs)
at major Area Control Centres (ACCs) and ATC towers across the country. The CCC
provides ATFM service in conjunction with the FMPs.

131

AIR REGULATIONS

In phase I, Flow Management Positions (FMPs) of six airports namely Delhi,
Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai, Kolkata and Hyderabad, which account for 60 % Air
Traffic handled at Indian Airports, have become operational to provide support to
Central Command Center (CCC). In Phase II, FMPs will be made operational in a
phased manner at additional 30 airports.

FLIGHT INFORMATION SERVICE

Application Flight information service shall be provided to all aircraft which
are likely to be affected by the information and which are:

a) provided with air traffic control service; or
b) otherwise known to the relevant air traffic services units.

Scope of Flight Information Service Flight information service shall include

the provision of pertinent:

a) SIGMET and AIRMET information; AIRMET is not provided in India.

b) information concerning pre-eruption volcanic activity, volcanic eruptions and
volcanic ash clouds;

c) information concerning the release into the atmosphere of radioactive materials
or toxic chemicals;

d) information on changes in the serviceability of navigation aids;

e) information on changes in condition of aerodromes and associated facilities,
including information on the state of the aerodrome movement areas when they
ate affected by snow, ice or significant depth of water;

f) information on unmanned free balloons; and of any other information likely to
affect safety.

Flight information service provided to flights shall include,

a) weather conditions reported or forecast at departure, destination and alternate
aerodromes;

b) collision hazards, to aircraft operating in airspace Classes C, D, E, F and G;

c) for flight over water areas, in so far as practicable and when requested by a pilot,
any available information such as radio call sign, position, true track, speed,
etc., of surface vessels in the area.

ATS units shall transmit, as soon as practicable, special air-reports to other
aircraft concerned, to the associated meteorological office, and to other ATS units
concerned.

Flight information service provided to VFR flights shall include, the provision
of available information concerning traffic and weather conditions along the route of
flight that are likely to make operation under the visual flight rules impracticable.

132

--- Page 73 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

OPERATIONAL FLIGHT INFORMATION SERVICE BROADCASTS
APPLICATION

Voice-automatic Terminal Information Service (Voice-ATIS) broadcasts:
shall be provided at aerodromes where there is a requirement to reduce the
communication load on the ATS VHF air-ground communication channels.

A discrete VHF frequency shall, whenever practicable, be used for Voice-ATIS
broadcasts. If a discrete frequency is not available, the transmission may be made on
the voice channel(s) of the most appropriate terminal navigation aid(s), preferably a
VOR, provided the range and readability are adequate and the identification of the
navigation aid is sequenced with the broadcast so that the latter is not obliterated.

Voice-ATIS broadcasts shall not be transmitted on the voice channel of an ILS.

Whenever Voice-ATIS is provided, the broadcast shall be continuous and
repetitive.

The Voice-ATIS broadcast message should, whenever practicable, not exceed 30
seconds.

Data link-automatic terminal information service (D-ATIS) Where a D-ATIS
supplements the existing availability of Voice-ATIS, the information shall be identical
in both content and format to the applicable Voice-ATIS broadcast.

Automatic terminal information service (voice and/or data link)
Whenever Voice-ATIS and/or D-ATIS is provided:

a) the information communicated shall relate to a single aerodrome;

b) the information communicated shall be updated immediately a significant
change occurs;

c) the preparation and dissemination of the ATIS message shall be the responsibility
of the air traffic services;

d) individual ATIS messages shall be identified by a designator in the form of a
letter of the ICAO spelling alphabet. Designators assigned to consecutive ATIS
messages shall be in alphabetical order;

e) aircraft shall acknowledge receipt of the information upon establishing
communication with the ATS unit providing approach control service or the
aerodrome control tower, as appropriate;

f) the appropriate ATS unit shall, when replying to the message in e) above or,
in the case of arriving aircraft, at such other time as may be prescribed by
the appropriate ATS authority, provide the aircraft with the current altimeter
setting; and

g) the meteorological information shall be extracted from the local meteorological
routine or special report.

133

AIR REGULATIONS

When rapidly changing meteorological conditions make it inadvisable to include
a weather report in the ATIS, the ATIS messages shall indicate that the relevant
weather information will be given on initial contact with the appropriate ATS unit.

Information contained in a current ATIS, the receipt of which has been
acknowledged by the aircraft concerned, need not be included in a directed transmission
to the aircraft, with the exception of the altimeter setting.

ATIS for arriving and departing aircraft ATIS messages containing both
arrival and departure information shall contain the following elements of information
in the order listed:

a) name of aerodrome;

b) arrival and/or departure indicator;

c) contract type, if communication is via D-ATIS;

d) designator;

e) time of observation, if appropriate;

f) type of approach(es) to be expected;

g) the runway(s) in use; status of arresting system constituting a potential hazard,
if any;

h) _ significant runway surface conditions and, if appropriate, braking action;

i) holding delay, if appropriate;

j) transition level, if applicable;

k) other essential operational information;

ih) surface wind direction and speed, including significant variations and, if surface
wind sensors related specifically to the sections of runway(s) in use are available
and the information is required by operators, the indication of the runway and
the section of the runway to which the information refers;

*m) visibility and, when applicable, RVR;
*n) present weather;

*o) cloud below 1 500 m (5 000 ft) or below the highest minimum sector altitude,
wiuchever is greater; cumulonimbus; if the sky is obscured, vertical visibility
when available;

p) air temperature;
q) dew point temperature;
x) altimeter setting(s);

s) any available information on significant meteorological phenomena in the
approach and climb-out areas including wind shear, and information on recent

134

--- Page 74 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

weather of operational significance;
t) trend forecast, when available; and
u) specific ATIS instructions.

* These elements are replaced by the term “CAVOK”, whenever visibility, cloud and
present weather is better than prescribed value or conditions.

; Air traffic advisory service is provided to aircraft operating outside controlled
airspace on ATS routes classified “F”,

IFR flights electing to use air traffic advisory service when operating within
Class F airspace are expected to comply with the same procedures as those applying to
controlled flights except that

; The flight plan and changes thereto are not subject to a clearance, since the unit
furnishing air traffic service will only provide advice on the presence of essential traffic
or suggestions as to a possible cause of action.

; Air-ground contacts shall be made with the air traffic services unit designated to
provide air traffic advisory service within the advisory airspace or portion thereof.

ALERTING SERVICE
Application Alerting service shall be provided:
a) for all aircraft provided with air traffic control service;

b) in so far as practicable, to all other aircraft having filed a flight plan or otherwise
known to the air traffic services; and

c) to any aircraft known or believed to be the subject of unlawful interference.

Flight information centres or area control centres shall serve as the central point
for collecting all information relevant to a state of emergency of an aircraft operating
within the flight information region or control area concerned and for forwarding such
information to the appropriate rescue coordination centre.

; Air traffic services units shall notify rescue coordination centres immediately an
aircraft is considered to be in a state of emergency in accordance with the following:

a) Uncertainty phase (INCERFA) when:
1) no communication has been received from an aircraft within a period of
thirty minutes after the time a communication should have been received,

or from the time an unsuccessful attempt to establish communication with
such aircraft was first made, whichever is the earlier, or when

135

AIR REGULATIONS

2) an aircraft fails to arrive within thirty minutes of the estimated time of
arrival last notified to or estimated by air traffic services units, whichever
is the later, except when no doubt exists as to the safety of the aircraft and
its occupants.

b) Alert Phase (ALERFA) when:

1) following the uncertainty phase, subsequent attempts to establish
communication with the aircraft or inquiries to other relevant sources
have failed to reveal any news of the aircraft, or when

2) an aircraft has been cleared to land and fails to land within five minutes
of the estimated time of landing and communication has not been
reestablished with the aircraft, or when

3) information has been received which indicates that the operating efficiency
of the aircraft has been impaired, but not to the extent that a forced landing
is likely, except when evidence exists that would allay apprehension as to
the safety of the aircraft and its occupants, or when

4) an aircraft is known or believed to be the subject of unlawful interference.
c) Distress Phase (DETRESFA) when:

1) following the alert phase, further unsuccessful attempts to establish
communication with the aircraft and more widespread unsuccessful
inquiries point to the probability that the aircraft is in distress, or when

2) the fuel on board is considered to be exhausted, or to be insufficient to
enable the aircraft to reach safety, or when

3) information is received which indicates that the operating efficiency of the
aircraft has been impaired to the extent that a forced landing is likely, or
when

4) information is received or it is reasonably certain that the aircraft is about
to make or has made a forced landing, except when there is reasonable
certainty that the aircraft and its occupants are not threatened by grave
and imminent danger and do not require immediate assistance.

Information to aircraft operating in the vicinity of an aircraft in a
state of emergency. When it has been established by an air traffic services unit
that an aircraft is in a state of emergency, other aircraft known to be in the vicinity
of the aircraft involved shall be informed of the nature of the emergency as soon as
practicable. When an air traffic services unit knows or believes that an aircraft is
being subjected to unlawful interference, no reference shall be made in ATS airground
communications to the nature of the emergency unless it has first been referred to in
communications from the aircraft involved and it is certain that such reference will not
aggravate the situation.

136

--- Page 75 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE IDENTIFICATION OF RNP TYPES AND
THE IDENTIFICATION OF ATS ROUTES OTHER THAN STANDARD
DEPARTURE AND ARRIVAL ROUTES

Composition of Designator

The ATS route designator shall consist of a basic designator supplemented, if
necessary, by:

a) one prefix as prescribed; and

b) one additional letter as prescribed.

The number of characters required to compose the designator shall not exceed
six characters.

The number of characters required to compose the designator should, whenever
possible, be kept to a maximum of five characters.

The basic designator shall consist of one letter of the alphabet followed by a
number from 1 to 999. ; :

Selection of the letter shall be made from those listed hereunder:

a) A,B,G, R for routes which form part of the regional networks of ATS routes
and are not area navigation routes;

b) L, M,N, P for area navigation routes which form part of the regional
networks of ATS routes;

c) H,J, V, W for routes which do not form part of the regional networks of ATS
routes and are not area navigation routes;

d) Q,T, Y, Z for area navigation routes which do not form part of the regional
networks of ATS routes.

Where applicable, one supplementary letter shall be added as a prefix to the

basic designator in accordance with the following:

1. K to indicate a low-level route established for use primarily by helicopters;

2. U to indicate that the route or portion thereof is established in the upper

airspace;

8. S to indicate a route established exclusively for use by supersonic aircraft

during acceleration, deceleration and while in supersonic flight.

When prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority or on the basis of regional air
navigation agreements, a supplementary letter may be added after the basic designator
of the ATS route in question in order to indicate the type of service provided or the turn
performance required on the route in question in accordance with the following:

a) the letter F to indicate that on the route or portion thereof advisory service
only is provided;

d) the letter G to indicate that on the route or portion thereof flight information
service only is provided.

137

AIR REGULATIONS

ATS Routes in India.

>
>

Aircraft shall obtain ATC clearance from the appropriate ATS unit at least
10 minutes prior to entering controlled airspace.

Aircraft shall not join or cross ATS routes without prior approval/ATC
clearance from the ATS units concerned. This approval/clearance shall be
obtain at least 10 minutes prior to entry into ATS routes if in direct contact
on VHF and at least 20 minutes prior to such entry if contact is through en-
route radio frequency.

All aircraft transiting from one FIR to another FIR shall forward estimates
for FIR boundary including flight level to the ATS unit responsible for
providing flight information service in the FIR to be entered, at least 10
minutes prior to the entry.

These provisions will not apply to aircraft transiting from one Indian FIR to
another Indian FIR. Provisions will continue to apply to all aircraft, when
transiting from a foreign FIR into Indian FIR except where specifically
indicated otherwise against an ATS route.

Aircraft will join or cross ATS routes at or close to a designated reporting
point. Aircraft crossing that route shall do so at the angle of 90° to the
direction of the route and at a level appropriate to the magnetic track. VFR
flights to cross ATS routes outside the Controlled airspace shall only cross
them at an appropriate VFR level at right angle to the direction of the ATS
route, or as close as possible to this angle.

* The pilot shall report position as soon as possible after the aircraft
has passed over each designated reporting point of ATS route defined
by designated significant points. Additional reports over other points
may be requested by ATC when so required for air traffic management
(ATM) purposes.

* On routes not defined by designated significant points, position reports
shall be made after the first half hour of flight and at hourly interval
thereafter. Additional reports at shorter intervals of time may be
requested by ATC units when so required for ATS purposes.

The minimum flight altitude on the ATS routes as presented in AIP have
been determined so as to ensure at least 1000 ft (300m) vertical clearance
above the highest obstacle within 10 KM on each side of the centre line of
the route.

All aircraft are forbidden to operate within 15NM of the international
border of India unless specifically permitted or except when following the
ATS route or operating to and from any aerodrome situated within 15NM of
the international border of India.

138

--- Page 76 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

> Scheduled international flights are permitted to flight plan using domestic
ATS routes segments to/from destination, departure and approved alternate
airports in India which are not connected by international ATS Routes.

> Flying outside of ATS routes is prohibited within Indian FIRs, unless
otherwise authorised by ATC.

Strayed Aircraft:

; An aircraft that has deviated significantly from its intended track or reports
that it is lost. As soon as an ATS (air traffic services) unit becomes aware of a strayed
aircraft, it takes all necessary steps to assist the aircraft and safeguard its flight. An
aircraft may be considered as “strayed” by one unit and as “unidentified” by another.

Types of services.

With the exception of services provided at military air bases, the following types
of services are provided :

i) Air Traffic Control Service

ii) Air Traffic Advisory Services

iii) Flight Information Service and Alerting Service
iv) Surveillance Services

There is no distinction between upper and lower controlled airspace.

139

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

Alower limit of a Control Area shall be established at a height above the ground
level or water of not less than:

A) 150 metres

B) 200 metres

C) 300 metres

The Approach Control Service is an air traffic control service
A) _ provided for the arriving and departing controlled flights

B) for IFR flights arriving and departing

C) provided for IFR traffic within a Control Zone

The units providing Air Traffic Services are:

A) Area control Center- Advisory Center- Flight information Center- Approach
Control Office and Tower

B) Area Control Center- Flight Information Center-. Approach Cotrol Office-
Aerodrome Control Tower and Air Traffic Services reporting office

C) Area Control Center- Approach Control Office and Aerodrome Control Tower
only.

Air traffic control service is provided for the purpose of:

A) Avoiding collisions between all aircraft and maintaining an orderly flow of air
traffic

B) Preventing collisions between aircraft, between aircraft and obstacles on the
manoeuvring area and expediting and maintaining an orderly flow of air traffic

C) Preventing collisions between controlled air. traffic and expediting and
maintaining an orderly flow of air traffic

To perform a VFR flight in airspace classification E

A) _ aclearance and/or two-way radio communication is required
B) aclearance is required

C) two-way radio communication is not required

Which statement is correct?

A) The lower limit of an UIR may coincide with an IFR cruising level

B) The lower limit of a TMA shall be established at a height of at least 700ft AGL

C) The upper limit of a CTR shall be established at a height of at least 3000ft
AMSL

What is the speed limit (IAS) in an airspace class E?
A)  250kt VFR and IFR, ail levels

B) 250kt for IFR and VFR up to FL 100
C) 250 kt only for IFR up to FL 100

140

--- Page 77 ---

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

The speed limitation for IFR flights inside ATS airspace classified as C, when
flying below 3050m (1000ft) AMSL, is:

A) 250ktIAS

B) Not applicable

C)  250kt TAS

RCP 10 means:

A) 10 is the number of seconds it takes for an instruction to travel from the ground
to aircraft and acknowledgment back to the ground.

B) 10 is the maximum number of minutes it takes for an instruction to be executed
by an aircraft.

C) Aircraft must communicate with ATC every 10 minutes.

An ATS airspace where IFR and VFR flights are permitted, all flights are subject
to air traffic control service and are separated from each other is classified as
A) Airspace C

B) Airspace B

C) Airspace D

The speed limitation for both IFR flights and VFR flights inside ATS airspace
classified as B, when flying below 3050m (10000ft) AMLS, is:

A)  260ktIAS
B) Not applicable
C) 250kt IAS

Air traffic services unit clocks and other time recording devices shall be
checked as necessary to ensure correct time within plus or minus

A) 1 minute of UTC at all times

B) 15 seconds of UTC at all times

C) 30seconds of UTC at all times

The following airspace falls under Kolkata FIR?

A) VED
B) VEB
Cc) VOR

The VMC minima for a VER flight inside an ATS airspace classified as B, is:

A) — 8km visibility when at or above 3050m (10000ft) AMSL and clear of clouds

B) —8km visibility when at or above 3050m (10000ft) AMSL, and 1500m horizontal
and 300m vertical from clouds

C)  5NM visibility when below 3050m (10000ft) AMSL, 1500m horizontal and 300m
vertical from cloud

141

15.

16.

17.

18.

19

20.

AIR REGULATIONS

A VFR flight when flying inside an ATS airspace classified as B has to maintain

the following minima of flight visibility and distance from clouds

A) — 5km visibility, 14500m horizontal and 300m vertical from clouds

B)  8km below 3050m (10000ft) AMSL, 1500m horizontal and 300m vertical from
clouds

C) 5km below 3050m (10000ft) AMSL and clear of clouds

An ATS airspace where iFR and VFR flights are permitted, all flights are subject
to air traffic control service and IFR flights are separated from other IFR flights
and from VFR flights VFR flights are separated from IFR flights and receive
traffic information in respect of other VFR flights, is classified as:

A) Airspace B

B) Airspace E

C) Airspace C

Which condition is requested so that an aerodrome may be considered

controlled?

A) The aerodrome shall be provided with a Control Tower

B) The aerodrome shall be located within a Control Zone (CTR) and provided with
a Control Tower

C) The aerodrome shall be located within a Control Zone

An ATS airspace where IFR and VFR flights are permitted and all flights are
subject to air traffic control service. IFR flights are separated from other IFR
flights and receive traffic information in respect of VFR flights. VFR flights
receive traffic information in respect of all other flights, is classified as:

A) Airspace B
B) Airspace D
C)  AijrspaceA

An ATS airspace where IFR and VFR flights are permitted are subject to Air
Traffic Control Service and are separated from other IFR flights. All flights
receive traffic information as far as practical, is classified as

A) Airspace D
B) Airspace A
C) Airspace E

An ATS airspace where IFR and VFR flights are permitted, all participating
IFR flights receive an air traffic advisory service and all flights receive flight
information service if requested, is classified

A) Airspace F
B)  Aijrspace E
C) Airspace D

142

--- Page 78 ---

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

Which statement regarding approach control service is correct?

A) — Approach control have to advise the aircraft operators about substantial delays
in departure in any event when they are expected to exceed 45 minutes

B) During a visual approach an aircraft is maintaining its own separation

C) If it is anticipated that an aircraft has to hold for 30 minutes or more, an
Expected Approach Time will be transmitted by the most expeditious means to
the aircraft

Which statement regarding aerodrome control service is correct?

A) An aircraft entering the traffic circuit without permission of ATC, will be cleared
to land if this is desirable

B) Suspension of VFR operations can not be initiated by the aerodrome controller

C) ATC permission is required for entering the apron with a vehicle

In ATS route designator UA1Y what does U mean:

A) Upper.
B) —Undirectional.
C) Uniform.

Special VFR flights may be authorized to operate locally within a control zone
when the ground visibility is not less than 1500 metres, even when the aircraft
is not equipped with a functioning radio receiver within class:

A) D airspace

B) DandE airspace

C) E airspace

Flight information service shail be provided to all aircraft which are likely to be

affected by the information and which are:

A) _ Provided with the air traffic control services and otherwise known to the relevant
air traffic service units

B) Known to the relevant air traffic services units by a filed flightplan

C) Provided with air traffic control services, only

Alerting service shall be provided:

A) For all controlled flight, to any aircraft known or believed to be subject of
unlawful interference, and in so far as practicable to all aircraft having filed a
flight plan or otherwise known to the ATS

B) For all aircraft provided with air traffic control services, only

C) To any aircraft known or believed to be subject of unlawful interference, only

143

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

AIR REGULATIONS

The speed limitation for IFR flights inside ATS airspace classified as E, when
flying below 3050m (10000ft) AMSL, is:

A)  250kt TAS

B)  250ktiAS

C) Not applicable

Air Traffic Service unit means:

A) _ Air Traffic Control units and Air Services reporting offices

B) _ Flight Information Centers and Air Services reporting offices

C) Air Traffic Control units, Flight Information Centers or Air Services reporting
Offices

Acontrolled airspace extending upwards from a specified limit above the earth
is:

A) Advisory airspace

B) Control area

C) _ Flight Information Region

Tirupati aerodrome designator is?

A) VATP
B) VOTP
Cc) ViTP

Aerodrome traffic is:

A) _ All traffic on the manoeuvring area and flying in the vicinity of an aerodrome
B) All traffic in the aerodrome circuit

C) All traffic on the manoeuvring area

Which of the following Annexes to the Chicago convention contains international
standards and recommended practices for air traffic services (ATS)?

A) Annex6
B) Annex 14
C) Annex 11

An information issued by a meteorological watch office concerning the
occurence or expected occurence of specified en-route weather phenomena
which may affect the safety of low-level aircraft operations and which was
not already included in the forecast issued for low level flights in the flight
information region concerned or sub-area thereof is

A) An En-Route Met Report

B) ANOTAM

C) AnAIRMET information

144

--- Page 79 ---

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

Regarding Aerodrome Flight Information (AFIS):

A) _ Its purpose is to supply ATC services but it is not a state organisation

B) It can only supply limited services to the users and under no circumstances
may it supply ATC services

C) It has the same privileges and prerogatives as an ATC organisation but its
activity is neither continuous nor regular

Air Traffic Control service shall be provided to::

A) _ AllIFR flights in class A, B, C, D, E and F airspaces.
B) All VFR flights in class B, C, D and E airspaces.

C)  Toall aerodrome traffic at controlled aerodromes.

Flight Information Region (FIR) is an airspace within which the following
services are provided:

A) _ Flight Information Service and Alerting Service

B) _ Flight information Service and Advisory Service

C) _ Flight Information Service, Alerting Service and Advisory Service

Control Area (CTA) is defined as follows:

A) Acontrolled airspace extending upwards from a specified limit above the earth

B) A controlled airspace extending upwards from the surface of the earth to a
specified limit

C)  Acontrolled airspace extending upwards from a height of 900ft above the earth

Aerodrome local flying area is to be considered, if ATZ is not notified:
A) With in 5 NM of ARP up to 3000 feet.

B) With in 25 NM of ARP up to 10,000 feet.

C) Within 10 NM of ARP up to 5000 feet.

An air traffic control unit:

A) May ask an aircraft to temporarily change its callsign for safety reasons when
there is a risk of confusion between two or more similar callsigns

B) May not ask an aircraft to change its callsign after accepting the flight plan

C) Must not ask an aircraft to change its callsign

Required Navigation Performance (RNP) shall be prescribed
A) _ By regional air navigation agreements

B) By states but not on the basis of regional air agreements

C) By states on the basis of regional air navigation agreements

145

41.

42.

43.

45.

46.

47.

AIR REGULATIONS

A Control Zone shall extend laterally to at least:

A) 10 miles from the centre of the aerodrome or aerodromes concerned in the
direction from which approaches may be made

B) 5 nautical miles from the centre of the aerodrome or aerodromes concerned in
the direction from which approaches may be made

C) 20 miles from the centre of the aerodrome or aerodromes concerned in the
direction from which approaches may be made

G245ZF is a designator for:
A) aSID

B) aSTAR

C) anATS Route

An ATS airspace where IFR and VFR are permitted and receive flight information
service if requested, is classified as

A) Airspace G

B) Airspace E

C) Airspace C

Concerning to RNP (Required Navigation Performance) types, the indication
RNP 4, represents a navigation accuracy of

A) Plus or minus 4 NM ona 95% containment basis

B) Plus or minus 4 NM on a 98% containment basis

C) Plus or minus 4 NM on a 90% containment basis

Area Control Centers issue clearances for the purpose of:
A) Achieving separation between IFR flights

B) Achieving separation between controlled flights

C) Providing flight information Service

Clearances will be issued by an ATC unit for the purpose of:
A) Achieving separation between controlled flights

B) Providing alerting services

C) Providing advisory services

You receive an IFR enroute clearance starting: Clearance expires at 0920. What
does it mean?

A) _ If not airborne until 0920, a new clearance has to be issued

B) The take off clearance is expected at 0920

C) After 0920 return to the ramp and file a new flight plan

146

--- Page 80 ---

48.

49.

50.

51,

52.

53.

54.

ATR TRAFFIC SERVICES

ATIS broadcast

A) Shall only be transmitted on a discrete VHF frequency
B) Shall not be transmitted on the voice channel of an ILS
C) Shall not be transmitted on the voice of VOR

Whenever ATIS is provided, the preparation and dissemination of the ATIS
message shall be the responsibility of

A) _ Both air traffic services and the meteorological office

B) The meteorological office serving the aerodromes

C) The air traffic services

Whenever ATIS is provided, the broadcast information shall be updated
A) As prescribed by the meteorological office

B) Immediately a significant change occurs

C) As prescribed by the state

The ATIS broadcast message should, whenever practicable, not exceed

A) 30seconds
B) 1minute
C) 2minutes

ATIS broadcast messages containing departure and arrival information should

include cloud cover, when the clouds are:

A) Below 900m (3000ft) or below the highest minimum sector altitude, whichever
is the greater

B) Below 2000m (600ft) or below the highest minimum sector altitude, whichever
is the greater

C) Below 1500m (5000ft) or below the highest minimum sector altitude, whichever
is the greater

When are ATIS broadcasts updated?

A) Upon receipt of any official weather, regardless of content change or reported
values

B) Every 30 minutes if weather conditions are below those for VFR; otherwise
hourly

C) Only when the ceiling and/or visibility changes by a reportable value

Flight Information Service shall be provided to aircraft in order to avoid collision
hazards when operating in airspace classes:

A)  FandGonly

B) C,D,E,FandG

C) A,B,C,D,E,FandG

147

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

AIR REGULATIONS

The lateral limit of CTR shall extend to atleast NMs from the center of
aerodrome in directions from where approaches may be made:

A) 25
B) 10
c) 5

At radio communications, “Distress” differs from “Urgency” because in the
first case

A) _ The aeroplane has suffered damages which impair its fitness to fly

B) There is a serious and imminent danger requiring immediate assistance

C) The aeroplane will not be able to reach a suitable aerodrome

The Alerting Service is provided by:

A) The Area Control Centers

B) TheATS unit responsible for the aircraft at that moment
C) Only by ATC units

The phases related to an aircraft in emergency or believed in emergency are:
A) Uncertainty phase, distress phase, urgency phase

B) Uncertainty phase, alert phase, distress phase

C) Uncertainty phase, urgency phase, distress phase

When an aircraft is experiencing difficulties, triggering of the alert phase is the
responsibility of

A) — Search and rescue coordination centers

B) Control centers only

C) _ Air traffic control and flight information centers

What type of flight is allowed in class A airspace
A) IFRonly

B) IFRand VFR

C)  IFRand special VFR

Alert phase is defined as follows:

A)  Asituation where an apprehension exists as to the safety of an aircraft and its
occupants

B) An emergency event in which an aircraft and its occupants are considered to
be threatened by a danger

C)  Assituation related to an aircraft and its occupants are considered to be in a
state of emergency

148

--- Page 81 ---

62.

63.

65.

66.

67.

68

69.

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

A situation in which apprehension exists as to the safety of an aircraft. To
which emergency phase does this situation correspond?

A) ALERFA

B) INCERFA

C) DETRESFA

Which of the following signals is a distress signal?

A) _ Inradiotelephony the spoken words PAN, PAN

B) Aparachute flare showing a red light

C) The repeated switching on and off of the navigation lights

An aircraft is in emergency when:

A) _ Itis threatened by grave danger

B) It is threatened by grave danger and requires immediate assistance
C) _ Itis forced to land

The different emergency phases (in correct order) are:
A) INCERFA, ALERTFA and DISTRESFA

B) INCERFA, ALERFA, DETRESFA

C) ALERTFA, DISTRESFA, RESCUEFA

Which of the following statements describes the Alert Phase (ALERFA)?

A) Anaircraft fails to arrive within 30 minutes of the ETA which was last notified to
ATC.

B) Anaircraft declares that the fuel remaining is insufficient to reach safety.

C) Anaircraft which has been cleared to land fails to land within 5 minutes of the
ETA and communication has not been re-established.

DETRESFA is where:

A) An aircraft fails to land within 5 minutes of being cleared to land
B) All answers are correct.

C) The fuel on board is considered to be exhausted

. RSP 180 indicates:

A) Time in seconds taken by a pilot to receive surveillance instructions from the
controller.

B) Time in seconds between flight crew/HMI and controller/HMI.

C) Distance in NMs between two way points in defined RSP airspace.

. Astrayed aircraft is an aircraft:

A) _ that has deviated significantly from its intended track or reports that it is lost.

B) that has been observed or is reported to be operating in a given area but whose
identity has not been established.

C) _ only that aircraft which has deviated significantly its intended track.

149

70.

71.

72.

73.

74,

75.

AIR REGULATIONS

Having filed a flight plan to a particular destination and having landed at
another destination, you should notify ATC:

A) _ within 60 minutes after landing at the alternate destination

B) _ within 30 minutes after landing at the alternate destination

C) within 30 minutes of your intended ETA at your original destination.

Designated airspace within controlled airspace in India is classified as Class:

A) Cc

B) D

C) CandD.

TSA801(A) is an airspace:

A) temporarily segregated and allocated in Delhi FIR
B) temporarily segregated and allocated in Chennai FIR
C) denoting an area navigation route in India

Temporary Reserved Area (TRA) is an airspace temporarily reserved and
allocated:

A) _ through which other traffic may be allowed to transit in VMC only

B) through which other traffic is not allowed to transit with out proper equipment
C) _ through which other traffic may be allowed to transit under ATC clearance

MFA published in AIP ensures at least 1000 feet vertical clearance from
obstacles within of center line?

A) 10Kms
B) 10NMs
C) 20NMs
Class C airspaces in India extend from to.

A) Ground level, FL 150
B) 4000 feet, FL 285
C) FL150, FL 290

150

--- Page 82 ---

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES

ANSWERS

pi T2Ts Ta tstTe[7[sle yon] 2] a] a
pease [eieljefelslalelatec fala

is] 16] 17118] | 2 | 1] 2 [eo [2 | 26 | DT] De
ATC TABI] ClAlcfaAlalc lava ysi[c

29 | 30_| 31 | 32 | 33 | 34 | 35 | 36 [37 [38 [30 | 40 | 41 [42 |
BB yA Te eye ica lala la lc Tate

}43 | 44 | 45 [46 | 47 [48 [49 | 50 [51 [52 [53 | 54 | 55 | 56 |
AJA |e [AtaAtB {cis fate [ats [clea

87 | 58 | 59 | 60 | 61 | 62 | 63 | 64 [6s [66 [67 | 68 | 69 | 70,
Bia |cl[alaltalseisisie jc |e safc!

po [eB fc fale |

151

AIR REGULATIONS

152

--- Page 83 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICE

SEPARATION METHODS AND MINIMA
(PANS ATM Doc 4444, AIP, India)

This chapter contains procedures and procedural separation minima for use in the
separation of aircraft in the en-route phase as well as aircraft in the arrival and
departure phases of flight.

GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR THE SEPARATION OF
CONTROLLED TRAFFIC

Vertical or horizontal separation shall be provided:
a) _ between all flights in Class A and B airspaces;
b) between IFR flights in Class C, D and E airspaces;
c) between IFR flights and VFR flights in Class C airspace;
d) _ between IFR flights and special VFR flights; and

e) between special VFR flights, when so prescribed by the appropriate ATS
authority except for IFR flights in airspace classes D and E, during the
hours of daylight when flights have been cleared to climb or descend subject
to maintaining own separation and remaining in visual meteorological
conditions.

Composite separation: Consisting of a combination of vertical separation and
horizontal separation, using minima for each which may be lower than, but not less
than half of, those used for each of the combined elements when applied individually.
Composite separation shall only be applied on the basis of regional air navigation
agreements.

VERTICAL SEPARATION

Vertical Separation Minimum

a) A nominal 1000 feet below FL290 and a nominal 2000 feet at or above FL290,
except as provided for in b) below; and

153

AIR REGULATIONS

b) A nominal 1000 feet when both aircraft are RVSM compliant and operating
within designated RVSM airspace.

Cruise Climb

Cruise climb is not permitted in Indian FIRs.

Vertical Separation during climb and descent
An aircraft may be cleared to a level previously occupied by another aircraft

after the latter has reported vacating it, except when:

a) severe turbulence is known to exist; or

b) the aircraft concerned are established at the same holding pattern; or

c) the difference in aircraft performance is such that less than the applicable
separation minimum may result; in which case such clearance shall be withheld
until the aircraft vacating the level has reported at or passing another level
separated by the required minimum.

Pilot in direct communication with each other may, with their concurrence, be
cleared to maintain a specified vertical separation between their aircraft during ascent
or descent.

VMC Climb and Descents:

When so requested by an aircraft and provided it is agreed by the pilot of the other
aircraft, an ATC unit may clear a controlled flight, including departing and arriving
flights, operating in airspace Classes D and E in VMC during the hours of daylight to
fly subject to maintaining own separation to one other aircraft and remaining in VMC.

When a controlled flight is so cleared, the following shall apply:

a) Clearances shall be for a specified portion of the flight at or below 10,000 feet,
during climb and descent;

b) Essential traffic information shall be passed; and

c) If there is possibility that flight under VMC may become impracticable, an IFR
flight shall be provided with alternative instructions to be complied with in the
event that in VMC cannot be maintained for the term of clearance.

Horizontal Separation
The three types of horizontal separation are:

a) Lateral separation; b) Longitudinal separation; c) Separation minima based on ATS
surveillance systems.

Lateral Separation
Means by which lateral separation may be applied include the following:

By using the same or different geographic locations:

By position reports which positively indicate the aircraft are over different

154

--- Page 84 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

geographic locations as determined visually or by reference to a navigation aid.

By use of NDB, VOR or GNSS on intersecting tracks or ATS routes.

By requiring aircraft to fly on specified tracks which are separated by a minimum

amount appropriate to the navigation aid employed. Lateral i
amount appropriate ployed. al separation between two

a) VOR

Both aircraft are established on radials divergi
. : ging by at least 15 d
least one aircraft is 15 NM or more from the facility. sgrees and at

b) NDB

Both aircraft are established on tracks to or from the NDB, which are diverging
by at least 30 degrees and at least one aircraft is 15 NM or more from the facility. at
least 20 degrees from the radial of first aircraft; and ,

28 kim 1 SHB}.
we Op be
a)

155

AIR REGULATIONS

c) GNSS/GNSS

Each aircraft is confirmed to be established on a track with zero offset between
two waypoints and at least one aircraft is at a minimum distance from a common point
as specified in Table below. or

d) VOR/GNSS

The aircraft using VOR is established on a radial to or from the VOR and the
other aircraft using GNSS is confirmed to be established on a track with zero offset
between two waypoints and at least one aircraft is at a minimum distance from a
common point as specified in Table below.

Aircraft 1: VOR or GNSS
Aircraft 2: GNSS

Angular difference FL 010 — FL 190 FL 200 — FL 600

between tracks measured Distance from a common Distance from a common
at the common point point point

(degrees)

The distances in the table are ground distances. States must take into account the
distance (slant range) from the source of a DME signal to the receiving antenna
when DME is being utilized to provide range information.

Table : Lateral separation aircraft flying VOR and GNSS

Before applying GNSS-based track separation, the controller shall confirm the
following:
a) ensure that the aircraft is navigating using GNSS; and
b) in airspace where strategic lateral offsets are authorized, that a lateral
offset is not being applied.

GNSS-based track separation shall not be applied in cases of pilot-reported
receiver autonomous integrity monitoring (RAIM) outages.
By use of different navigation aids or methods.

Lateral separation between aircraft using different navigation aids, or when one
aircraft is using RNAV equipment, shall be established by ensuring that the derived
protected airspaces for the navigation aid(s) or RNP do not overlap.

156

--- Page 85 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

Longitudinal Separation
Longitudinal separation shall be applied so that the spacing between the
estimated positions of the aircraft being separated is never less than a prescribed

minimum.
For the purpose of application of longitudinal separation, the terms same track,
reciprocal tracks and crossing tracks shall have the following meanings:

a) Same Track

Same direction tracks and intersecting tracks or portions thereof, the angular
difference of which is less than 45 degrees or more than 315 degrees, and whose
protection areas overlap.

LESS THEN 45°
oR
MORE THEN 135°

:
- oe,

: an

b) Reciprocal Tracks

Opposite tracks and intersecting tracks or portions thereof, the angular
difference of which is more than 135 degrees but less than 225 degrees, and whose
protection areas overlap.

as
s
%

MORE THEH 135° aes eile:
AND : ——
LESS THEN Cy see
a 4
ns?

c) Crossing Tracks
Intersecting tracks or portions thereof other than those specified in a) and b)
above.

157

AIR REGULATIONS

Longitudinal separation minima based on time:

Cross Check Calculations

a) Separation requirements must be cross-checked to ensure the integrity of
calculations.

b) The cross-check is to validate the initial calculation and to confirm that the
calculation is consistent with the traffic disposition.

Aircraft at the same cruising level
Aircraft flying on the same track:

a) 15 minutes;

i Paar ae

15 min separation between aircraft on same track and same level

b) 10 minutes, if navigation aids permit frequent determination of position and
speed;

Navigation Navigation

10 min separation between aircraft on same track and same level

c) five minutes in the following cases, provided that in each case preceding aircraft is
maintaining a true airspeed faster than the succeeding aircraft of 37 kmph (20
knots) or more:

(i) between aircraft that have departed from the same aerodrome;
(ii) between en-route aircraft that have reported over the same exact
significant point;

158

--- Page 86 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

Gii) between departing and en-route aircraft after the en-route aircraft has
reported over a fix that is so located in relation to the departure point as
to ensure that five-minute separation can be established at the point the
departing aircraft will join the air route; or

Aerodome 37 kmph (20kt}
or Reporting Paint. or more faster

hee 5 min
Longitudinal Separation by 5 minutes
d) three minutes in the cases listed under (c) provided that in each case the preceding

aircraft is maintaining a true airspeed faster than the succeeding aircraft of 74
kmph (40 knots) or more.

Acrodome
or Reporting Point

® le 3 ruin

74 kmph (40kt)
or more faster

Longitudinal Separation by 3 minutes

Aircraft flying on crossing tracks:

a) 15 minutes;

15 minute separation
between aircraft on
crossing track and same aaa
level , k#—45 min

b) 10 minutes if navigation aids permit frequent determination of position and
speed

Havigation
aid

10 minute separation
between aircraft on
crossing track and same
level

Navigation 19 min ae
aid Navigation
aid

159

AIR REGULATIONS

c) 10 minutes while vertical separation does not exist, provided that such separation
is authorized only where navigation aids permit frequent determination of
position and speed.

FL 260
- FL 280

FL 240

1 min

15 minute separation between aircraft climbing on same track

FL 240 15 minute
separation
between aircraft
me ee oes FL 250 descending and on

same track

FL 260

FL 246

10 minute separation
between aircraft
climbing on same

track FL 260

10 minute separation
between aircraft
descending on same
track

160

--- Page 87 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

ad) 5 minutes while vertical separation does not exist, provided that the level change
ig commenced within 10 minutes of the time the second aircraft has reported
over an exact reporting point.

Aircraft Climbing or Descending

Traffic on the same track. When an aircraft will pass through the level of
another aircraft on the same track, the following minimum longitudinal separation
shall be provided:

a) 15 minutes while vertical separation does not exist.

Traffic on crossing tracks: least ten minutes prior to and after the time the
aircraft are estimated to pass, or are

a) 15 minutes while vertical separation estimated to have passed. does not exist.

b) 10 minutes while vertical separation does not exist, provided that such separation
is authorized only where ground-based navigation aids or GNSS permit frequent
determination of position and speed.

or
c) 5 minutes while vertical separation does not exist, provided that:

1) the level change is commenced within 10-minutes of the time the second
aircraft has reported over a common point which must be derived from
ground-based navigation aids or by GNSS; and

2) when issuing the clearance through third party communication or
CPDLC a restriction shall be added to the clearance to ensure that the
10 minute condition is satisfied.

161

AIR REGULATIONS
15 min
FL 260
— FL 256
FL 246

15 min

15 minute separation between
aircraft descending and on
crossing track

Havigation
aid

Separation for ascending aircraft on crossing track : 10 minutes

Traffic on reciprocal tracks. Where lateral separation is not provided, vertical
separation shall be provided for at least ten minutes prior to and after the time the
aircraft are estimated to pass, or are estimated to have passed.

Estimated time

of passing
Foe—_—_—_—_—_—_ ae a:

bs

10 minute separation between aircraft on reciprocal tracks

162

--- Page 88 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

Longitudinal separation minima based on distance using DME and/or GNSS

Separation shall be established by maintaining not less than specified distance(s)
between aircraft positions as reported by reference to DME in conjunction with other
appropriate navigation aids and/or GNSS. This type of separation shall be applied
between two aircraft using DME, or two aircraft using GNSS, or one aircraft using
DME and one aircraft using GNSS. Direct controller-pilot VHF voice communication
shall be maintained while such separation is used.

Note:— For the purpose of applying GNSS based separation minimum, a distance
derived from an integrated navigation system incorporating GNSS input is regarded
as equivalent to GNSS distance.

All distance reports must be made with reference to the same DME station.

When applying these separation minima between any aircraft with area
navigation capability, controllers shall specifically request GNSS derived distance.

Note:— Reason making a pilot unable to provide GNSS distance information may
include Traffic on reciprocal tracks.

Where lateral separation is not provided, vertical separation shall be provided
for at inadequate onboard equipment, on GNSS input into an integrated navigation
system, or a loss of GNSS integrity.

Aircraft at the same cruising level
Aircraft on the same track:

a) 20 NM, provided:
1) each aircraft utilizes,
i) the same “on track” DME station when both aircraft are utilizing DME, or

ii) an “on track” DME station and a collocated waypoint when one aircraft is
utilizing DME and the other is utilizing GNSS, or

iii) the same waypoint when both aircraft are utilizing GNSS, and

2) separation is checked by obtaining simultaneous DME and/or GNSS readings
from the aircraft at frequent intervals to ensure that the minimum will not be
infringed.

DME and/or collocated
waypoint

37 KM(20NM)

163

AIR REGULATIONS

b) 10NM, provided:
1) the leading aircraft maintains a true airspeed of 20 kt or more faster than the
succeeding aircraft;

2) each aircraft utilizes,
i) the same “on track” DME station when both aircraft are utilizing DME, or

ii) an “on track” DME station and a collocated waypoint when one aircraft is
utilizing DME and the other is utilizing GNSS, or

iii) the same waypoint when both aircraft are utilizing GNSS, and

38) separation is checked by obtaining simultaneous DME and/or GNSS readings
from the aircraft at frequent intervals to ensure that the minimum will not be

infringed.

37 KMéh (20 kt)
or more faster DME and/or collocated
m waypoint

45 km(10 NM)

Aircraft on crossing tracks:
a) 20 NM, provided:
i) each aircraft reports distance from the DME station and/or collocated
waypoint/or same waypoint located at the crossing point of the tracks and
that the relative angle between the tracks is less than 90 degrees; and

ii) separation is checked by obtaining simultaneous DME and/or GNSS
readings from the aircraft at frequent intervals to ensure that the
minimum will not be infringed.

ont 37 KMPH (20 KT)OR
ue / MORE FASTER

19KM Sf
(OHA

(20 HMMs):
i —_— Second aircraft not to be
o Second aircraft not to be 18 from the shaded area.

IB from the shaded area.

164

--- Page 89 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

b)  10NM provided:

i) the leading aircraft maintains a true airspeed of 20 kts or more faster than
the succeeding aircraft;

ii) each aircraft reports distance from the DME station and/or collocated
waypoint/or same waypoint located at the crossing point of the tracks and
that the relative angle between the tracks is less than 90 degrees; and

iii) separation is checked by obtaining simultaneous DME and/or GNSS
readings from the aircraft at such intervals as are necessary to ensure that
the minimum is established and will not be infringed.

Aircraft Climbing or Descending

Aircraft on the same track
10 NM while vertical separation does not exist, provided:
a) each aircraft utilizes,

i) the same “on track” DME station when both aircraft are utilizing DME, or
ii) an “on track” DME station and a collocated waypoint when one aircraft is
utilizing DME and the other is utilizing GNSS, or
iii) the same waypoint when both aircraft are utilizing GNSS, and
b) one aircraft maintains a level while vertical separation does not exist; and

Cc) separation is established by obtaining simultaneous DME and/or GNSS readings
from the aircraft.

FL 240
FL 250
FL 260 and/or collocated
waypoint
40H TRCK DME

Separation for aircraft ascending on the same tracks

165

AIR REGULATIONS

and/or collocated
waypoint

“OE Laat yg

Separation for aircraft descending on the same tracks

Aircraft on reciprocal tracks

Aircraft utilizing on-track DME and/or collocated waypoint or same waypoint
may be cleared to climb or descend to or through the levels occupied by other aircraft
utilizing on-track DME andor collocated waypoint or same waypoint, provided that
it has been positively established that the aircraft have passed each other and are at
least 10 NM apart.

et} ——— FL260
— -4 rr

ta
SL lONM rL3ae

z

~
ae

Gn took DME

Separation minima based on ATS surveillance systems.

The following horizontal separation minima based on radar and/or ADS-B and/
or MLAT systems shall be applied :

a) rive Nautical Miles (5 NM) horizontal separation upto 60 NM from radar
ead.

b) Nautical Miles (6 NM) within 60 NM of ADS-B ground station when only
ADS-B is used in non-radar environment.

c) ven Nautical Miles (10 NM) horizontal separation beyond 60 NM from radar
ead.

d) Ten Nautical Miles (10 NM) beyond 60 NM of ADS-B ground station when
only ADS-B is used in non radar environment.

e) 3NM from radar head where specifically authorized.

166

--- Page 90 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

SUMMARY OF LONGITIUDINAL SEPARATION
15 min Separation (if navigation aids do not permit frequent determination
of position and speed):
(i) Same level, same track and same level crossing tracks.

(ii) Climbing & descending same track and Climbing & descending crossing
tracks.

10 min Separation (if nav aids permit frequent determination of position and
speed)
(i) Same level, same track and same level crossing track.

(ii) Climbing & descending same track and climbing & descending crossing
track.

(iii) A/c on reciprocal tracks. From the estimated time of crossing the a/c is not
allowed to climb or descend upto 10 mins.
5 min Separation:-

(i) | Same level, Same track, common reference, a/c ahead 20kts faster and
either both a/c have departed from same aerodrome or both reported over
same reporting point or if departing is assured 5 mins separation at the
time of joining a route.

(ii) Climb and descend same track, level change within 10 mins of second a/c
reporting over same reporting point.

Gii) Between holding and route a/c.

3 min Separation

(i) Same level, same track, if a/c ahead is 40kts faster. And either both a/c
have departed from same aerodrome or both reported over same reporting
point or if departing is assured 5 mins separation at the time of joining a

route.
DISTANCE (DME) / GNSS SEPERATION
20 NM
@ Same level, same track
Gi) Same level, crossing track
10NM

(i) In the above situations, if the a/c ahead is 20 kts faster
Gi) A/c climbing & descending same track

Gii) A/c on reciprocal track

167

AIR REGULATIONS

LONGITUDINAL SEPARATION MINIMA WITH MACH
NUMBER TECHNIQUE BASED ON TIME AND DISTANCE:

When Mach number technique is applied, minimum longitudinal separation
between turbojet aircraft on the same track, whether in level, climbing or descending
flight shall be 10 minutes; or the prescribed minima based on application of differential
Mach number on prescribed ATS routes.

RNAV distance-based separation may be applied between RNAV equipped
aircraft when operating on designated RNAV routes or on ATS routes defined by VOR.

A150 km (80 NM) RNAV distance-based separation minimum with Mach number
technique may be used on same-direction tracks in lieu of a 10-minute longitudinal
separation minimum with Mach number technique.

Required navigation performance (RNP) for en-route operations. A
statement of the navigation performance necessary for operation within a defined
airspace.

For the en- route phase of flight, suitable RNP types (RNP 1, RNP 4, RNP 10, RNP 12.6
and RNP 20) shall be implemented.

Performance-based navigation (PBN) operations. The prescribed
navigation specification shall be appropriate to the level of communications, navigation
and air traffic services provided in the airspace concerned. (Refer Doc 9613).

Required communication performance (RCP) specification. A set of
requirements for air traffic service provision and associated ground equipment, aircraft
capability, and operations needed to support performance-based communication.

Performance-based communication (PBC) operations. In the case of
communications, the number attached to Required Communications Performance
(RCP) is the number of seconds it takes for an instruction to travel from the ground to
aircraft and acknowledgment back to the ground. RCP is classified based on transaction
time in seconds,eg, RCP 10,60,120,240 and 400 respectively.

Performance-based surveillance (PBS). ATS surveillance services and
capability based on performance requirements for air traffic service provision, aircraft
and flight operations along an ATS route, on an instrument approach procedure or in
a designated airspace.

Required surveillance performance (RSP) specification. A set of
requirements for air traffic service provision and associated ground equipment, aircraft
capability, and operations needed to support performance-based surveillance.

Required surveillance performance (RSP). Required Surveillance
Performance (RSP) is the number of seconds it takes for surveillance data from the
Communications Service Provider (CSP) interface to arrive at the ATSU flight data
processing system. RSP 180,240 and 400 indicate time in seconds between flight crew/
HMI and controller/HMI. HMI stands for Human Machine Interaction.

168

--- Page 91 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

PERFORMANCE-BASED LONGITUDINAL SEPARATION MINIMA.
For aircraft cruising, climbing or descending on:
a) the same track; or

b) crossing tracks provided that the relative angle between the tracks is less than 90
degrees, the following separation minima may be used:

Maximum ADS-C periodic
Separation minima RNP RCP RSP reporting interval
10 240 180 27 minut
93 km (50 NM) “me
4 240 180 32 minutes
55.5 km (80 NM) 2 or 4 240 180 12 minutes
5 minutes 2 or 40r 10 240 180 14 minutes

ESSENTIAL TRAFFIC INFORMATION

Essential traffic is that controlled traffic to which the provision of separation by
ATC is applicable, but which, in relation to a particular controlled flight is not, or will
not be, separated from other controlled traffic by the appropriate separation minimum.

Essential traffic information shall be given to controlled flights concerned
whenever they constitute essential traffic to each other.

169

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

An aircraft is maintaining FL 150 within airspace class D. Another aircraft below
at FL 140 is receiving a clearance to descend to FL 70. it is severe turbulence
in the area. When is the earliest that a clearance to descend to FL. 140 or below
can be expected?

A) | When the other aircraft has reported that it has left FL 140

B) When the other aircraft has reported that it has reached FL 70

C) When the other aircraft has reported that it has descended through FL 130

The longitudinal separation minima between aircraft departed from the
same aerodrome and following the same track, and the preceding aircraft is
maintaining a true airspeed of 20kt or more faster than the succeeding aircraft,
is:

A) 5 minutes

B) 3 minutes

C) 2 minutes

The longitudinal separation minima based on time between aircraft at same
cruising level where navigation aids permit frequent determination of position
and speed and the preceeding aircraft is maintaining a true airspeed of 40kt or
more faster than the succeeding aircraft, is:

A)  5minutes

B)  3minutes

C) 10 minutes

The longitudinal separation minima based on time between aircraft at same
cruising level where navigation aids permit frequent determination of position
and speed and the preceeding aircraft is maintaining a true airspeed of 20kt or
more faster than the succeeding aircraft, is:

A) 15 minutes

B) 10 minutes

C) 5S minutes

The longitudinal separation minima based on time between aircraft at same
cruising level where navigation aids permit frequent determination of position
and speed, is:

A) 10 minutes

B)  3minutes

C) 15 minutes

170

--- Page 92 ---

10.

11.

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

The longitudinal separation minima between aircraft departed from the
same aerodrome and following the same track, and the preceding aircraft is
maintaining a true airspeed of 40kt or more faster than the succeeding aircraft,
is:

A) 10 minutes

B) 8minutes

C) 3minutes

The longitudinal separation minima based on distance using DME, and each
aircraft “on track” uses DME stations, is:

A)  10NM
B) 20NM
C) 5NM

When an aircraft will pass through the level of another aircraft on the same
track, the following minimum longitudinal separation shall be provided:

A) 5 minutes at the time the level is crossed

B) 15 minutes at the time the level is crossed

C) 10 minutes at the time the level is crossed

“ESSENTIAL TRAFFIC” is that controlled flight to which the provision of
separation by ATC is applicable, but which, in relation to a particular controlled
flight is not separated therefore by the appropriate separation minima. Whenever
separation minima is not applied. The following flights are considered essential
traffic one to each other.

A) _ AIlIFR flights in controlled airspace and controlled VFR

B) — Only controlled IFR flights

C) Controlled VFR flights and VFR flights

Above FL 290 the vertical flight separation between aircraft on the same
direction is:

A)  2000ft
B)  4000ft
C)  3000ft

Track separation between aircraft using the same NDB shall be applied
requiring the aircraft to fly:

A) Atleast 30° separated at a distance of 15NM or more from the facility

B) Atleast 45° separated at a distance of 15NM or more from the facility

C) Atleast 30° separated at a distance of 15 miles or more from the facility

171

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

AIR REGULATIONS

Two aircraft flying at FL 170 using GNSS are confirmed to be established on
tracks separated by 120 degrees with zero offset between two waypoints. At
least one aircraft is to be at a minimum distance NMs from a common
point for separation.

A) 5
B) 10
c) 15

If an ATC clearance is not suitable to the pilot in command of an aircraft:

A) He may request another clearance and the ATC concerned has to accept the
pilot request

B) He may request and, if practicable, obtain an amended clearance

C) The pilot has to accept the ATC clearance because it has been based on the
flightplan filed with ATC

The “VMC and own separation” ATC clearance is used for a controlled flight to

cross the level of another controlled flight when:

A) Requested by the pilot in airspace classes A and B and authorised by ATC

B) Requested by the pilot, during the day light and authorized by the state
overflown

C) Requested by the pilot and authorized by the state overflown

Alc on same level converging track has separation

A) 15min
B) 10min
C) = 5min

What are the controlled IFR separation methods applied by ATC?
A) _ Vertical, horizontal and composite separation

B) Time separation and track separation

C) Composite separation

The vertical IFR separation minimum being applied by ATC within a controlled
airspace below FL 290 is:

A) 500ft (150m)

B) 2000ft (600m)

C)  1000ft (300m)

The vertical IFR separation minimum being applied by ATC within a controlled
airspace above FL 290 is:

A) —500ft (150m)

B) 2000ft (600m)

C)  1000ft (300m)

172

--- Page 93 ---

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

Longitudinal separation minima based on distance using DME for aircraft
at the same cruising level and track, provided that each aircraft utilizes “on
Track” DME stations and separation is checked by obtaining simultaneous
DME readings, is:

A) 20NM
B) 25NM
C) 40NM

A “RNAV” distance based separation minimum may be used at the time the
level is crossed, provided that each aircraft reports its distance to or from the
same “on track”way-point. This minimum is:

A) 20NM
B) 80NM
C) 60NM

A VER flight constitutes essential traffic to other VFR flights, when operating in
controlled airspace classified as:

A) B
B) B,C,DandE
C) Bandc

RCP 120 is the number of :

A) _ Transmissions loaded on aircraft FMS for data link exchange.

B) Minutes required to divert to a suitable aerdrome under ETOP conditions.

C) Seconds it takes for an instruction to travel from the ground to aircraft and
acknowledgment back to the ground.

Vertical or horizontal separation shall be provided between:
A) _ All flights in class A, B and C airspaces

B) All flights in class A and B airspaces

C) All flights in class B, C and D airspaces

The separation method whereby the vertical and horizontal separation may be
reduced till a maximum of half the standard criteria is called:

A) Composite separation

B) Reduced separation

C) Combined separation

ADS-B ground station is more than 110 NMs from two aircraft at same level. Only
ADS-B is being used for separation in non radar environment. The minimum

safe distance between these aircraft is NMs.
A) 10

B) 5

Cc) 3

173

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

AIR REGULATIONS

Cruising level IFR during cruise within controlled airspace shall be given as
flight level (FL)

A) Above the transition altitude when applicable

B) Only in airspace class A

C) _ Ifthe obstacle clearance is more than 2000ft

Aircraft flying along the same track may be separated by DME-distances from
the same DME and it is confirmed that the aircraft have passed each other.
Specify the shortest difference in DME-distance to make it possible for one
aircraft to climb or descend

A) 10NM
B) 12NM
C) 15NM

Track separation between aircraft using the same VOR shall be applied
requiring the aircraft to fly:

A) Atleast 15° separated at a distance of 15 miles or more from the facility

B) Atleast 15° separated at a distance of 15NM or more from the facility

C) Atleast 30° separated at a distance of 15NM or more from the facility

ATC clearances are solely issued for:

A) _ Alerting pilots about other aircraft in close vicinity
B) Making pilots follow laid down procedures

C) Expediting and separating air traffic

The longitudinal separation minima based on DME, and each aircraft “on track”

uses DME stations, is:

A) —10NM provided that the leading aircraft maintains a true airspeed of 40kt or
more faster than the succeeding aircraft

B) 10NM provided that the leading aircraft maintains a true airspeed of 20kt or
more faster than the succeeding aircraft

C)  20NM provided that the leading aircraft maintains a true airspeed of 10kt or
more faster than the succeeding aircraft

174

--- Page 94 ---

AREA CONTROL SERVICES

ANSWERS

pe pays ats Pe tT Tt ete fo lat
pc fatse|ctatect{spitseatatse fa |

p12 [13 [4] ts | te | 7 | 8 | 8 | 0 at | 2
pc [e}e}jatatc|}satats fate |

[mle ela] we] we] HO |
relalalalals|c|.s |

175

AIR REGULATIONS

176

--- Page 95 ---

7

APPROACH CONTROL
SERVICE

SEPARATION IN THE VICINITY OF AERODROMES
(Doc 4444, AIP, India)

PROCEDURES FOR DEPARTING AIRCRAFT

GENERAL

Clearances for departing aircraft shall specify, when necessary for the separation
of aircraft, direction of takeoff and turn after take-off; heading or track to be made
good before taking up the cleared departure track; level to maintain before continuing
climb to assigned level; time, point and/or rate at which a level change shall be made;
and any other necessary manoeuvre consistent with safe operation of the aircraft. At
aerodromes where standard instrument departures (SIDs) have been established,
departing aircraft should normally be cleared to follow the appropriate SID.

Minimum Separation between Departing Aircraft

One-minute separation if aircraft are to fly on tracks diverging by at least 45
degrees immediately after take-off so that lateral separation is provided.

177

AIR REGULATIONS

Two minutes between take-offs when the preceding aircraft i; 40 kt or more
faster than the following aircraft and both aircraft propose to follow the same track.

AOkt of more
faster

Five-minute separation while vertical separation does not exist if a departing
aircraft will be flown through the level of a preceding departing aircraft and both
aircraft propose to follow the same track. Action must be taken to ensure that the five-
minute separation will be maintained or increased while vertical separation does not
exist.

Separation of departing aircraft from arriving aircraft

The following separation shall be applied when take-off clearance is based on the
position of an arriving aircraft:

If an arriving aircraft is making a complete instrument approach, a departing
aircraft may take off:

a) in any direction until an arriving aircraft has started its procedure turn or base
turn leading to final approach;

b) in a direction which is different by at least 45 degrees from the reciprocal of
the direction of approach after the arriving aircraft has started procedure turn
or base turn leading to final approach, provided that the take-off will be made
at least three minutes before the arriving aircraft is estimated to be over the
beginning of the instrument runway.

If an arriving aircraft is making a straight-in approach, a departing aircraft may
take off:

a) in any direction until five minutes before the arriving aircraft is estimated to be
over the instrument runway;

b) ina direction which is different by at least 45 degrees from the reciprocal of the
direction of approach of the arriving aircraft:

i) until three minutes before the arriving aircraft is estimated to be over the
beginning of the instrument runway, or

178

--- Page 96 ---

APPROACH CONTROL SERVICE

ii) __ before the arriving aircraft crossing a designated fix on the approach track;
the location of such fix to be determined by the appropriate ATS authority
after consultation with the operators.

No take-olfs pemnitted in this
area after the procedure turn is
started nor within the last 5
minutes of a straight-in-approach

Take-offs pesmitted in this area
upto 3 minutes before estimated
attival of aircraft & of Bor, in the
case of A, until it crasses a
designated fix on track

Seperation of Departing aircraft from Arriving aircraft

REDUCTION IN SEPARATION MINIMA IN THE VICINITY OF
AERODROMES

In the vicinity of aerodromes, the separation minima may be reduced if:

a) adequate separation can be provided by the aerodrome controller when each
aircraft is continuously visible to this controller; or

b) each aircraft is continuously visible to flight crews of the other aircraft concerned
and the pilots thereof report that they can maintain their own separation; or

c) in the case of one aircraft following another. The flight crew of the succeeding
aircraft reports that the other aircraft is in sight and separation can be
maintained.

179

AIR REGULATIONS

INFORMATION FOR DEPARTING AIRCRAFT

Meteorological Conditions

Information regarding significant changes in the meteorological conditions in
the take-off or climb-out area, obtained by the unit providing approach control service
after a departing aircraft has established communication with such unit, shall be
transmitted to the aircraft without delay, except when it is known that the aircraft
already has received the information.

Note:— Significant changes in this context include those relating to surface wind
direction or speed, visibility, runway visual range or air temperature (for turbine-
engine aircraft), and the occurrence of thunderstorm or cumulonimbus, moderate or
severe turbulence, wind shear, hail, moderate or severe icing, severe squall line, freezing
precipitation, severe mountain waves, sand storm, dust storm, blowing snow, tornado
or waterspout.

Operational status of visual or non-visual aids

Information regarding changes in the operational status of visual or non-visual
aids essential for take-off and climb shall be transmitted without delay to a departing
aircraft, except when it is known that the aircraft already has received the information.

PROCEDURES FOR ARRIVING AIRCRAFT

General

At aerodromes where standard instrument arrivals (STARs) have been
established, arriving aircraft should normally be cleared to follow the appropriate
STAR. The aircraft shall be informed of the type of approach to expect and runway-in-
use as early as possible.

After coordination with the approach control unit, the ACC may clear the first
arriving aircraft for approach rather than to a holding fix.

Visual Approach:

Visual approach is an approach by an IFR flight when either part or all of an
instrument approach procedure is not completed and the approach is executed in visual
reference to terrain.

Clearance for an IFR flight to execute a visual approach may be requested by the
pilot or initiated by the controller.

The controller shall not initiate a visual approach when there is a reason to
believe that the flight crew concerned is not familiar with the aerodrome and its
surrounding terrain.

Controller should take into consideration the prevailing traffic and meteorological
conditions before initiating visual approach.

180

--- Page 97 ---

APPROACH CONTROL SERVICE

Aircraft may be cleared for direct base leg/ final, if there is reasonable assurance
that visual approach and landing can be completed.

Separation shall be provided between an aircraft cleared to execute a visual
approach and other arriving and departing aircraft.

When clearance to execute visual approach has been issued, it shall be the
responsibility of pilot to maintain terrain clearance.

Visual approach by a flight crew:

A flight crew may request visual approach if he has runway in sight and the pilot
can maintain visual reference to terrain subject to the following conditions only:

a. Ground visibility is not below the higher of aerodrome operating minima of
associated non-precision approach or minimum visibility/RVR of 2800 m for
Category A/B aeroplanes, 3200 m for Category C aeroplanes and 3600 m for
Category D aeroplanes. If visual approach is requested for a runway which
has only a circling approach, the ground visibility shall not be less than 5
Kn, and

b. either, the reported ceiling is at or above the level of the beginning of the
initial approach segment; or

c. the pilot reports at the level of the beginning of the initial approach
segment or at any time during the instrument approach procedure that the
meteorological conditions are such that with reasonable assurance a visual
approach and landing can be completed.

The pilot at the time of requesting for visual approach should give position
report.

The pilot shall advise the controller immediately when

a) weather has deteriorated and unable to keep the terrain in sight; or

b) unable to continue flight following the preceding aircraft; or

c) additional spacing is required from preceding aircraft.
Instrument Approach

The approach control unit shall specify the instrument approach procedure to be
used by arriving aircraft. A flight crew may request an alternative procedure and, if
circumstances permit, should be cleared accordingly.

181

AIR REGULATIONS

CLEARANCE TO FLY MAINTAINING OWN SEPARATION WHILE IN VMC

When so requested by an aircraft and provided it is agreed by the pilot of the
other aircraft and so authorised by the appropriate ATS authority, an ATC unit may
clear a controlled flight, including departing and arriving flights, operating in airspace
Classes Dand E in VMC during the hours of daylight to fly subject to maintaining own
separation to one other aircraft and remaining in VMC. When a controlled flight is so
cleared, the following shall apply:

a) The clearance shall be for a specified portion of the flight at or below 3050
m(10,000 ft), during climb or descent and subject to further restrictions as and
when prescribed on the basis of regional air navigation agreements.

b) If there is a possibility that flight under VMC may become impracticable, an IFR
flight shall be provided with alternative instructions to be complied with in the
event that flight in VMC cannot be maintained for the term of the clearance.

c) The pilot of an IFR flight, on observing that conditions are deteriorating and
considering that operation in VMC will become impossible, shall inform ATC
before entering IMC and shall proceed in accordance with the alternative
instructions given. Essential traffic information shall be given to controlled
flights concerned whenever they constitute essential traffic to each other.

Expected Approach Time (EAT)

An expected approach time shall be determined for an arriving aircraft that will
be subjected to a delay of 10 minutes or more. The expected approach time shall be
transmitted to the aircraft as soon as practicable and preferably not later than at the
commencement of its initial descent from cruising level. A revised expected approach
time shall be transmitted to the aircraft without delay whenever it differs from that
previously transmitted by 5 minutes or more, or such lesser period of time as agreed
between the ATS units concerned.

An expected approach time shall be transmitted to the aircraft by the most
expeditious means whenever it is anticipated that the aircraft will be required to hold
for 30 minutes or more.

The holding fix to which an expected approach time relates shall be identified
together with the expected approach time whenever circumstances are such that this
would not otherwise be evident to the pilot.

Onwara Clearance Time

Tn the event an aircraft is held en route or at a location or aid other than the
initial approach fix, the aircraft concerned shall, as soon as practicable, be given an
expected onward clearance time from the holding fix . The aircraft shall also be advised
if further holding at subsequent holding fix is expected.

Note:— “Onward clearance time” is the time at which an aircraft can expect to leave the
fix at which it is being held.

182

--- Page 98 ---

APPROACH CONTROL SERVICE

INFORMATION FOR ARRIVING AIRCRAFT

As early as practicable after an aircraft has established communication with the
unit providing approach control service, the following elements of information, in the
order listed, shall be transmitted to the aircraft, with the exception of such elements
which it is known the aircraft has already received:

a) type of approach and runway-in-use;
b) meteorological information, as follows:

c) current runway surface conditions, in case of precipitants or other temporary
hazards;

d) changes in the operational status of visual and non visual aids essential for
approach and landing.

If it becomes necessary or operationally desirable that an arriving aircraft follow
an instrument approach procedure or use a runway other than that initially stated,
the flight crew shall be advised without delay.

At the commencement of final approach, the following information shall be
transmitted to aircraft:

a) significant changes in the mean surface wind direction and speed;

Note:— If the controller possesses wind information in the form of components, the
significant changes are:

@ Mean head-wind component: 10 kt
@ Mean tail-wind component: 2 kt
e@ Mean cross-wind component: 5 kt
b) the latest information, if any, on wind shear and/or turbulence in the final
approach area;

c) the current visibility representative of the direction of approach and landing
or, when provided, the current runway visual range value(s) and the trend, if
practicable, supplemented by slant visual range value(s), if provided.

During final approach, the following information shall be transmitted without delay:
a) the sudden occurrence of hazards (e.g. unauthorized traffic on the runway);

b) significant variations in the current surface wind, expressed in terms of minimum
and maximum values;

c) significant changes in runway surface conditions;
f ‘ . * . . .
d) changes in the‘operational status of required visual or non-visual aids;
a

e) changes'in observed RVR value(s), in accordance with the reported scale in
use, or changes in the visibility representative of the direction of approach and
landing. '

183

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

If an arriving aircraft is making a straight in approach a departing aircraft may

take off in any direction

A) Until five minutes before the arriving aircraft is estimated to be over the
instrument runway

B) Until ten minutes before the arriving aircraft is estimated to be over the
instrument runway

C) Until two minutes before the arriving aircraft is estimated to be over the
instrument runway

For controlied traffic that shall be separated in the vicinity of an airport,

separation minima may be reduced:

A) At the discretion of the air traffic controller

B) When the commander in the following aircraft has the preceding aircraft in
sight and is able to maintain own separation

C) _ If the commander of the involved aircraft so requests

At the commencement of final approach, if the controller possesses wind
information in the form of components, significant changes in the mean surface
wind direction and speed shall be transmitted to aircraft. The mean tail-wind
component significant change is:

A) 3kt
B)  4kt
C)  2kt

The EAT has to be transmitted to the pilot as soon as possible, in case the
expected delay is:

A) 5 minutes or more

B) 15 minutes or more

C) 20 minutes

Aso Called “Visual Approach” can be performed:

A) During VFR flight, there should be a visibility of 5km or more

R) During IFR flights, if the cloudbase is 1000ft more than the appropriate DA or
MDA for that procedure

C) During IFR flights, if there is permanent sight on the movement area and the
underlying ground

184

--- Page 99 ---

10.

APPROACH CONTROL SERVICE

“Time Approach Procedure” is used as necessary to expedite the approach of
a number of arriving aircraft. This will be obtained requesting aircraft:

A) To maintain a specified speed during the approach procedure

B) Topass the specified point inbound at the previously notified time

C) To apply a step down descent between aircraft in the approach sequence

During an arrival procedure under an IFR flight plan in VMC conditions, traffic
avoidance is the responsibility of:

A) _ The radar controller

B) The pilot in command

C) The approach controller

If the crew on an arriving aircraft approaching a controlled aerodrome will
report “field in sight”, a clearance for “visual approach” may be given under
certain conditions

A) | The meteorological visibility must not be less than 8km

B) The approach must be passing the FAF

C) The air traffic controller will provide separation to other controlled traffic

Which statement is correct? During a “visual approach” in controlled airspace
(class C):

A) ATC will apply separation with other traffic

B) The pilot has to apply separation with other traffic

C) ATC will apply separation with other arriving traffic

One minute separation may be used between departing aircraft if they are to fly
on tracks divering by atleast:

A) 30° immediately after take-off

B) 15° immediately after take-off

C) 45° immediately after take-off

185

AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

Pt Tz; ste tstet7 {3s} 9 {0 |
faAtetec>Tatec{eat[eatc{atltc |

186


--- Page 100 ---

PROCEDURES FOR
AERODROME CONTROL
SERVICE

(Doc 4444, AIP, India)

FUNCTIONS OF AERODROME CONTROL TOWERS

Aerodrome control towers shall issue information and clearances to aircraft
under their control to achieve a safe, orderly and expeditious flow of air traffic on and
in the vicinity of an aerodrome with the object of preventing collision(s) between:

a) aircraft flying within the designated area of responsibility of the control tower,
including the aerodrome traffic circuits;

b) aircraft operating on the manoeuvring area;

c) aircraft landing and taking off;

d) aircraft and vehicles operating on the manoeuvring area;

e) aircraft on the manoeuvring area and obstructions on that area.

Aerodrome controllers shall maintain a continuous watch on ail flight operations
on and in the vicinity of an aerodrome as well as vehicles and personnel on the
manoeuvring area. Watch shall be maintained by visual observation, augmented in
low visibility conditions by an ATS surveillance system when available. Traffic shall be
controlled in accordance with the procedures set forth herein and all applicable traffic
rules / Temporary Local Instructions (TLI) of the concerned airport. If there are other
aerodromes within a control zone, traffic at all aerodro nes within such a zone shall be
coordinated so that traffic circuits do not conflict.

187

AIR REGULATIONS

The functions of an aerodrome control tower may be performed by different
control or working positions, such as:

ry aerodrome controller, normally responsible for operations on the runway and
aircraft flying within the area of responsibility of the aerodrome control tower;

e ground controller, normally responsible for traffic on the manoeuvring area
with the exception of runways;

e Clearance delivery position, normally responsible for delivery of start-up
and ATC clearance to departing IFR flights.

Where parallel or near parallel runways are used for simultaneous operations,
individual aerodrome controllers should be responsible for operations on each of the
runways.

ALERTING SERVICE PROVIDED BY AERODROME CONTROL TOWERS

Aerodrome control towers are responsible for alerting the rescue and fire fighting
services whenever:

a) an aircraft accident has occurred on or in the vicinity of the aerodrome; or,

b) information is received that the safety of an aircraft which is or will come under
the jurisdiction of the aerodrome control tower may have or has been impaired;
or

c) requested by the flight crew; or
d) when otherwise deemed necessary or desirable.

PROCEDURE FOR START-UP AND ASSIGNMENT OF FLIGHT LEVEL
TO DEPARTING AIRCRAFT

> Before asking for startup or push back clearance, pilot of an aircraft must ensure
that its step ladder or Aerobridge has been removed and doors are closed.

> Pilot shall intimate total number of persons on board including crew and security
check completed to aerodrome control tower when requesting start-up clearance.

> The sequence of departure would be determined and intimated based on their
taxiing sequence, sequence at holding point, except where a deviation is made to
facilitate a VIP aircraft or change of order is resorted to for traffic reasons.

> Delays may be expected for the second aircraft to push-back when it is parked
adjacent to another aircraft being pushed-back.

> Delay in take-off due to restrictions in the ATC clearance and over-flights or the
appropriate ATS authority.

188

--- Page 101 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AERODROME CONTROL SERVICE

> There may be delay in take-off for an aircraft when it is proceeding on the same
track/level, or climbing through the level or to climb at higher rate of climb
behind a preceding traffic in order to establish the prescribed separation.

> A departing aircraft requesting the same cruising level as an over-flying aircraft
may have to accept an alternate level or may have to delay its departure in order
to establish the prescribed separation.

> Take-off and Landing

> The pilot-in-command shall not take-off or land without a clearance from the
appropriate ATC unit.

> The pilot-in-command shall not run-up on the runway in use unless authorized
by Aerodrome Control. Engine run ups in the holding pan or runway holding
position clear of the runway in use may be carried out subject to approval by
Aerodrome Control.

> To increase the runway capacity it is essential to minimize the runway occupancy
time. The following procedure should be followed to ensure minimum runway
occupancy time.

> As far as possible cockpit checks should be completed prior to lineup and any
checks requiring completion while on the runway should be kept to the minimum
required. Pilots should ensure that they are able to commence the take off run
immediately after take off clearance is issued. Pilots not able to comply with this
requirement must notify ATC prior to commencement of taxi.

> Pilots of arriving aircraft are reminded that rapid exits from the landing runway
enable ATC to apply minimum spacing on final approach that will achieve
maximum runway utilization.

> Cruise Climb is not permitted in Indian Flight Information Regions.

> Transonic and Supersonic phases of flight are not permitted over Indian airspace.

CONTROL OF AERODROME TRAFFIC

Designated positions of aircraft in the aerodrome traffic and taxi circuits

The following positions of aircraft in the traffic and taxi circuits are the positions
where the aircraft normally receive aerodrome control tower clearances. Where
practicable, all clearances should be issued without waiting for the aircraft to initiate
the call.

189

AIR REGULATIONS

Leg "Wind Direction ‘

U
| em AA Pa
L

Visual Circuit

i Beyond 4NM, upte SNM

Traffic on the manoeuvring area Control of Taxiing Aircraft

Taxi Clearance

a)

b)

Taxi clearances shall contain concise instructions and adequate information so
as to assist the flight crew to follow the correct taxi routes, to avoid collision
with other aircraft or objects and to minimize the potential for the aircraft
inadvertently entering an active runway.

When a taxi clearance contains a taxi limit beyond a runway, it shall contain an
explicit clearance to cross or an instruction to hold short of that runway.

Taxiing on a Runway-In-Use

a)

b)

¢)
d)

e)

For the purpose of expediting air traffic, aircraft may be permitted to taxi on the
runway-in-use, provided no delay or risk to other aircraft will result.

If the control tower is unable to determine, either visually or via an ATS
surveillance system that a vacating or crossing aircraft has cleared the runway,
the aircraft shall be requested to report when it has vacated the runway. The
report shall be made when the entire aircraft is beyond the relevant runway-
holding position.

Pilot who require to back-track the runway for departure must notify ATC prior
to commencement of taxi.

Unless prior permission has been obtained from ATC, the Pilot-in-Command
shall not hold on the runway-in-use.

Only one aircraft will be cleared to land on the runway-in-use at any one time
except formation flight by military aircraft.

190

--- Page 102 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AERODROME CONTROL SERVICE

Use of Runway-Holding Positions

a) Except as provided in b) below, aircraft shall not be held closer to a runway-in
use than at a runway-holding position.

b) Aircraft shall not be permitted to line up and hold on the approach end of a
runway-in-use whenever another aircraft is effecting a landing, until the landing
aircraft has passed the point of intended holding.

Landing
Aircraft

Runway in Use

At RWY Holding Position or

—a22+-. A) 50 M from RWY Edge where RWY is
. 900 M or more.
Holding B) 30 M from RWY Edge where RWY is
Aircraft less than 900 M.

INFORMATION TO AIRCRAFT BY AERODROME
CONTROL TOWERS

INFORMATION RELATED TO THE OPERATION OF AIRCRAFT

Start-Up Time Procedures:

Start-up time procedures should be contained in the local instructions and should
specify the criteria and conditions for determining when and how start-up times shall
be calculated and issued to departing aircraft.

Aerodrome and Meteorological Information

Prior to taxiing for take-off, aircraft shall be advised of the following elements of
information, in the order listed, with the exception of such elements which it is known
the aircraft has already received:

a) the runway to be used;
b) the surface wind direction and speed, including significant variations;

c) the QNH altimeter setting and, either on a regular basis in accordance with local
arrangements or if so requested by the aircraft, the QFE altimeter setting;

d) the air temperature for the runway to be used, in the case of turbine-engine
aircraft;

191

AIR REGULATIONS

e) the visibility representative of the direction of take-off and initial climb, if less
than 10 km, or, when applicable, the RVR value(s) for the runway to be used;

f) the correct time.
Prior to take-off aircraft shall be advised of:

a) any significant changes in the surface wind direction and speed, the air
temperature, and the visibility or RVR value(s)

b) significant meteorological conditions in the take-off and climb-out area, except
when it is known that the information has already been received by the aircraft.

Note:— Significant meteorological conditions in this context include the occurrence or
expected occurrence of cumulonimbus or thunderstorm, moderate or severe turbulence,
wind shear, hail, moderate or severe icing, severe squall line, freezing precipitation,
severe mountain waves, sand storm, dust storm, blowing snow, tornado or waterspout
in the take-off and climb out area.

Prior to entering the traffic circuit or commencing its approach to land, an aircraft
shall be provided with the following elements of information, in the order listed, with
the exception of such elements which it is known the aircraft has already received:

a) the runway to be used;
b) the surface wind direction and speed, including significant variations there from;

c) the QNH altimeter setting and, either on a regular basis in accordance with local
arrangements or, if so requested by the aircraft, the QFE altimeter setting
Essential Local Traffic Information

Essential local traffic shall be considered to consist of any aircraft, vehicle or
personnel on or near the manoeuvring area or traffic operating in the vicinity of the
aerodrome, which may constitute a hazard to the aircraft concerned.

Runway Incursion or Obstructed Runway

In the event the aerodrome controller observes, after a take-off clearance or a
landing clearance has been issued, any obstruction on the runway likely to impair the
safety of an aircraft taking off or landing, such as a runway incursion by an aircraft or
vehicle, or animals or flocks of birds on the runway, appropriate action shall be taken
as follows:

a) in all cases inform the aircraft concerned of the obstruction and its location on
the runway;

b) cancel the take-off clearance for an aircraft which has not started to roll;

c) instruct a landing aircraft to go around.

192

--- Page 103 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AERODROME CONTROL SERVICE

Uncertainty of position on the manoeuvring area

A pilot in doubt as to the position of the aircraft with respect to the manoeuvring
area shall immediately:

a) Stop the aircraft; and

b) Simultaneously notify the appropriate ATS unit of the circumstances (including
the last known position).

In those situations where a pilot is in doubt as to the position of the aircraft with
respect to the manoeuvring area, but recognizes that the aircraft is on a runway, the
pilot shall immediately:

a) Notify the appropriate ATS unit of the circumstances (including the last known
position);

b) If able to locate a nearby suitable taxiway, vacate the runway as expeditiously as
possible, unless otherwise instructed by the ATS unit; and then,

c) Stop the aircraft.

A vehicle driver in doubt as to the position of the vehicle with respect to the
manoeuvring area shall immediately:

a) Notify the appropriate ATS unit of the circumstances (including the last known
position);

b) Simultaneously, unless otherwise instructed by the ATS unit, vacate the landing
area, taxiway, or other part of the manoeuvring area, to a safe distance as
expeditiously as possible; and then,

c) Stop the vehicle.

In the event the aerodrome controller becomes aware of an aircraft or vehicle
that is lost or uncertain of its position on the manoeuvring area, appropriate action
shall be taken immediately to safeguard operations and assist the aircraft or vehicle
concerned to determine its position.

Wake Turbulence and Jet Blast Hazard

Aerodrome controllers shall, when applicable, apply the wake turbulence
separation minima specified. Whenever the responsibility for wake turbulence avoidance
rests with the pilot-in command, aerodrome controllers shall, to the extent practicable,
advise aircraft of the expected occurrence of hazards caused by turbulent wake.

193

AIR REGULATIONS

ESSENTIAL INFORMATION AERODROME CONDITIONS ON

Essential information on aerodrome conditions shall include information relating
to the following:

a) construction or maintenance work on, or immediately adjacent to the movement
area;

b) rough or broken surfaces on a runway, a taxiway or an apron, whether marked
or not;

c) snow, slush or ice on a runway, a taxiway or an apron;
d) water on a runway, a taxiway or an apron;
e) snow banks or drifts adjacent to a runway, a taxiway or an apron;

f) other temporary hazards, including parked aircraft and birds on the ground or
in the air;

g) failure or irregular operation of part or all of the aerodrome lighting system; h)
any other pertinent information.

CONTROL OF OTHER THAN AIRCRAFT TRAFFIC

Entry to the Manoeuvring Area

The movement of persons or vehicles including towed aircraft on the manoeuvring
area of an aerodrome shall be controlled by the aerodrome control tower as necessary
to avoid hazard to them or to aircraft landing, taxiing or taking off.

In conditions where low visibility procedures are in operation:

a) persons and vehicles operating on the manoeuvring area of an aerodrome shall
be restricted to the essential minimum, and particular regard shall be given
to the requirements to protect the ILS sensitive area(s) when Category II or
Category ITI A precision instrument operations are in progress;

b) The vehicles shall remain at safe distance from taxiing aircraft.

Priority on the Manoeuvring Area
Emergency vehicles proceeding to the assistance of an aircraft in distress shall
be afforded priority over all other surface movement traffic.

In emergency conditions or if the signals are not observed, the signal given
hereunder shall be used for runways or taxiways equipped with a lighting system and
shall have the meaning indicated therein .

Light signal Meaning
Flashing runway lights

Vacate the runway or taxiway and observe the tower for light signal

194

--- Page 104 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AERODROME CONTROL SERVICE

Priority Rules.

The following general rules, as detailed below, shall apply in determining the
order of priority of aircraft operations:

a) An aircraft which is known or believed to be in emergency compelling it to land
without delay; e.g. aircraft experiencing engine failure, acute shortage of fuel or
total communication failure.

b) Military fighter flights invariably experience shortage of fuel if not allowed to
proceed as per the planned operations. Any alteration to their optimum flight
profile (flight path/level) should be avoided / minimized in general. The ground
‘time limitations of military fighter aircraft entail that the departures are
accommodated from intended Civil/Military aerodromes without any delay.

c) An aircraft engaged in a live scramble.

d) An aircraft carrying sick or injured persons, requiring urgent medical attention
or carrying out approved medical evacuation (Medical Flights).

e) An aircraft carrying VVIP as laid down in procedures for their handling.

f) An aircraft proceeding on Search and Rescue missions.

g) Military flight carrying out large integrated formations in military exercises.

h) Aircraft / RPA in approved urgent operational military commitment which has
been coordinated with appropriate ATC Centres.

i) Aircraft on large scale weather deviations.

5) Aircraft landing at alternate aerodromes after diversion due adverse operational
or weather conditions at their intended destination.

SUSPENSION OF VISUAL FLIGHT RULES OPERATIONS

Any or all VFR operations on and in the vicinity of an aerodrome may be
suspended by any of the following units, persons or authorities whenever safety
requires such action:

a) the approach control unit or the appropriate ACC;
b) the aerodrome control tower;
c) the appropriate ATS authority.

All such suspensions of VFR operations shall be accomplished through or
notified to the aerodrome control tower.

The following procedures shall be observed by the aerodrome control tower
whenever VFR operations are suspended:

a) hold all VFR departures;

b) recall all local flights operating under VFR or obtain approval for special VFR
operations;

c) notify the approach control unit or ACC as appropriate of the action taken;

d) notify all operators, or their designated representatives, of the reason for taking
such action, if necessary or requested.

195

AIR REGULATIONS

CONTROL OF TRAFFIC IN THE TRAFFIC CIRCUIT

Entry of Traffic Circuit

The clearance to enter the traffic circuit should be issued to an aircraft whenever
it is desired that the aircraft approach the landing area in accordance with current
traffic circuits but traffic conditions do not yet allow a landing clearance to be issued.
Depending on the circumstances and traffic conditions, an aircraft may be cleared to
join at any position in the traffic circuit.

An arriving aircraft executing an instrument approach shall normally be cleared
to land straight in unless visual manoeuvring to the landing runway is required.

ORDER OF PRIORITY FOR ARRIVING AND DEPARTING AIRCRAFT

An aircraft landing or in the final stages of an approach to land shall normally have
priority over an aircraft intending to depart from the same or an intersecting runway.

CONTROL OF DEPARTING AIRCRAFT

Departure Sequence

Departures shall normally be cleared in the order in which they are ready for
take-off, except that deviations may be made from this order of priority to facilitate the
maximum number of departures with the least average delay.

Separation of departing aircraft

A departing aircraft will not normally be permitted to commence take-off until
the preceding departing aircraft has crossed the end of the runway-in-use or has
started a turn or until all preceding landing aircraft are clear of the runway-in-use.


--- Page 105 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AERODROME CONTROL SERVICE

Take-off Clearance

Take-off clearance may be issued to an aircraft when there is reasonable
assurance that the separation will exist when the aircraft commences take-off.

The take-off clearance shall be issued when the aircraft is ready for take-off and
at or approaching the departure runway, and the traffic situation permits. To reduce
the potential for misunderstanding, the take-off clearance shall include the designator
of the departure runway.

In the interest of expediting traffic, a clearance for immediate take-off may be
issued to an aircraft before it enters the runway. On acceptance of such clearance the
aircraft shall taxi out to the runway and take off in one continuous movement.

CONTROL OF ARRIVING AIRCRAFT

Separation of landing aircraft and preceding landing and departing aircraft
using the same runway A landing aircraft will not normally be permitted to cross
the runway threshold on its final approach until the preceding departing aircraft has
crossed the end of the runway-in-use, or has started a turn, or until all preceding
landing aircraft are clear of the runway-in-use

Clearance to Land

An aircraft may be cleared to land when there is reasonable assurance that the
separation in will exist when the aircraft crosses the runway threshold, provided that
a clearance to land shall not be issued until a preceding landing aircraft has crossed
the runway threshold. To reduce the potential for misunderstanding, the landing
clearance shall include the designator of the landing runway.

PROCEDURES FOR LOW VISIBILITY OPERATIONS

Control of aerodrome surface traffic in conditions of low visibility

In conditions where low visibility procedures are in operation, persons and
vehicles operating on the manoeuvring area of an aerodrome shall be restricted to the
essential minimum, and particular regard shall be given to the requirements to protect
the ILS sensitive area(s) when Category II or Category III A precision instrument
operations are in progress.

197

AIR REGULATIONS

AERONAUTICAL GROUND LIGHTS

General
All aeronautical ground lights shall be operated

a) during the time from sunset to sun rise;
b) during time from sunrise to sunset when visibility is 3000 m or less;
c) when requested by pilot;

d) at any other time when their use, based on meteorological conditions, is
considered desirable for the safety of air traffic.

Lights on and in the vicinity of aerodromes that are not intended for en-route
navigation purposes may be turned off, subject to further provisions hereafter, if no
likelihood of either regular or emergency operation exists, provided that they can be
again brought into operation at least one hour before the expected arrival of an aircraft.

At aerodromes equipped with lights of variable intensity a table of intensity
settings, based on conditions of visibility and ambient light, should be provided for
the guidance of air traffic controllers in effecting adjustment of these lights to suit
the prevailing conditions. When so requested by an aircraft, further adjustment of the
intensity shall be made whenever possible.

The lights of a visual approach slope indicator system shall be operated during
the hours of daylight as well as of darkness and irrespective of the visibility conditions
when the associated runway is being used.

Runway Lighting
Note-— Runway lighting includes such lights as edge, threshold, centre line, end,
touchdown zone and wing bar lighis.

Runway lighting shall not be operated if that runway is not in use for landing,
take-off or taxiing purposes, unless required for runway inspections or maintenance.

If runway lighting is not operated continuously, lighting following a take-off
shall be provided as specified below:

a) at aerodromes where air traffic control service is provided and where lights are
centrally controlled, the lights of one runway shall remain lighted after take
off as long as is considered necessary for the return of the aircraft due to an
emergency occurring during or immediately after take-off;

b) at aerodromes without air traffic control service or without centrally controlled
lights, the lights of one runway shall remain lighted until such time as would
normally be required to reactivate the lights in the likelihood of the departing
aircraft returning for an emergency landing, and in any case not less than fifteen
minutes after takeoff. :

198

--- Page 106 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AERODROME CONTROL SERVICE

WIND SHEAR ADVISORIES

Note:—Wind shear is a sustained change in the wind velocity along the aircraft flight
path, which occurs significantly faster than the aircraft can accelerate or decelerate. It
can occur at any level, but it is Tow level wind shear’, occurring from the surface to a
height of approximately 1500 feet, which can cause problems of sufficient magnitude to
affect the control of aircraft in departure or final approach phases of flight.

Whenever a pilot reports wind shear conditions to ATC, the information shall
be passed to subsequent arriving and departing aircraft until either confirmation
is received that the condition no longer exists or wind shear information has been
included in ATIS and flight crew of the concerned aircraft reports the receipt of the
appropriate ATIS designator.

Reports on wind shear from aircraft should be passed to Meteorological office.

Designation of Hot Spot

The aerodrome operator shall whenever necessary designate a location or several
locations on the movement area of the aerodrome as hot spot(s). The hot spot(s) shall
be chartered in accordance with Annex 4.

Coefficient of Friction.

The table below with associated descriptive terms was developed from friction
data collected only in compacted snow and ice and should not therefore be taken to be
absolute values applicable in all conditions.

Measured coefficient nv Estimated surface Friction Code
0.4 and above Good 5
0.39 to 0.36 Medium to good 4
0.35 to 0.30 Medium 5)
0.29 to 0.26 Medium to poor 2
0.25 and below Poor 1

It has been found necessary to provide assessed surface condition information,
including estimated surface friction, for each third of a runway. When giving landing
information to a pilot before landing, the sections are referred to as first, second or
third part of the runway. The first part always means the first third of the runway as
seen in the direction of landing.

199

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

When instructed by ATC to hold short of Runway pilot should stop:
A) With nose gear on hold line

B) So that no part of the A/c extends beyond hold line

C) So that the Fit Deck Area of A/c is even with the hold line

The following aircraft will be given priority to land:
A) Anaircraft with VVIP on board

B) An aircraft with critical shortage of fuel

C) Ascheduled aircraft

Apron is an area on aerodrome where following activities take place:

A) Loading /unloading of passengers, mail and cargo only.

B) Parking of aircraft only.

C) Loading/unloading of passengers, mail and cargo, fueling, parking or
maintenance.

For safety reasons, a person should remain away from a jet engine by at least:

A) 100’
B) 200’
C) 300’

Movement area of an aerodrome constitutes the following
A) Area including runways / taxiways excluding apron

B) Area excluding taxiways but including runways and apron
C) Area including runways / taxiways / aprons

The maneuvering area of an airport is that area

A) Normally referred to as the ramp or apron.

B) Used for taxiing, taking off and landing.

C) — Used when taxiing to and from the parking area.

An Aircraft shall report “long final” when itis at___ from the approach end of
the rwy
A)  8NMs
B) 4NMs
C) 1NMs
200

--- Page 107 ---

10.

11.

12.

PROCEDURES FOR AERODROME CONTROL SERVICE

What defines a controlled aerodrome?

A) _ It must be located within a CTR.

B) _ It must have a control tower giving an ATC service.
C) It must have a contro! tower and be in a CTR.

Aerodrome traffic is considered to be:

A) _ Aircraft on the movement area and flying in the vicinity.
B) _ Aircraft on the manoeuvring area and flying in the vicinity.
C) Aircraft on the movement area only.

Aircraft shall not be held closer to a runway-in-use:
A) _ Than at a runway-holding position.

B) Than at runway edge.

C) Than at 40m from the runway edge.

Friction Co efficient due to snow - in how many segments is runway divided

based on friction level.:

A) 1/2

B) 1/3

C) 1/4

Runway friction coefficient 0.20 means estimated surface friction:
A) Good

B) Medium to Good

C) Poor

201

AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

Ppt t2[st4 [st et 7{ se] 9 jo jn | 22 |
(ete tce;setc] si/alsei] sia |e jc |

202

--- Page 108 ---

USE OF AIR TRAFFIC
SERVICES SURVEILLANCE
SYSTEM

(DOC 4444 AND AIP, INDIA)

Introduction

ATS surveillance system. A generic term meaning variously, Automatic
Dependence Surveillance-B (ADS-B), Primary Surveillance Radar (PSR), Secondary
Surveillance Radar (SSR) or any comparable ground-based system that enables the
identification of aircraft.

PSR systems should be used in circumstances where other ATS surveillance
systems alone would not meet the air traffic services requirements.

SSR systems, especially those utilizing monopulse techniques or having Mode
S capability, or MLAT may be used alone, including in the provision of separation
between aircraft, provided:

a) the carriage of SSR transponders is mandatory within the area; and

b) identification is established and maintained.

ADS-B Applications.
Although the names are similar, ADS-C and ADS-B are two different applications.

Automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast (ADS-B), like primary
surveillance radar (PSR) and secondary surveillance radar (SSR) is an ATS surveillance
system which allows ATC to automatically and repeatedly access data from all suitably
equipped aircraft and both use and re-broadcast it to suitably equipped other aircraft
within range.

203

AIR REGULATIONS

Automatic dependent surveillance - contract (ADS-C) uses the same
systems on board the aircraft to automatically transmit similar information - aircraft
position, altitude, speed, elements of navigational intent and meteorological data - only
to one or more specific Air Traffic Services Unit (ATSU) or Aeronautical Operational
Control (AOC) facilities for surveillance and/or route conformance monitoring.

Data provision by an aircraft is generated in response to a request within the
terms of the ADS contract held by the ground system. This contract identifies the types
of information and the conditions under which reports are to be sent by the aircraft.
Some types of information are included in every report, while other types are provided
only if specified in an ADS contract request. The aircraft can also send unsolicited
ADS-C emergency reports to any ATSU that has an ADS contract with the aircraft.

Advantages of ADS-B.

ADS-B is an environmentally friendly technology that enhances safety and
efficiency, and directly benefits pilots, controllers, airports, airlines, and the public. It
forms the foundation for NextGen by moving from ground radar and navigational aids
to precise tracking using satellite signals.

With ADS-B, pilots for the first time see what controllers see: displays showing
other aircraft in the sky. Cockpit displays also pinpoint hazardous weather and terrain,
and give pilots important flight information, such as temporary flight restrictions.

ADS-B reduces the risk of runway incursions with cockpit and controller displays
that show the location of aircraft and equipped ground vehicles on airport surfaces —
even at night or during heavy rainfall. ADS-B applications being developed now will
give pilots indications or alerts of potential collisions.

ADS-B also provides greater coverage since ground stations are so much easier
to place than radar. Remote areas without radar coverage now have surveillance with
ADS-B.

Relying on satellites instead of ground navigational aids also means aircraft will
be able to fly more directly from Point A to B, saving time and money, and reducing fuel
burn and emissions.

MLAT Applications.

Multilateration is a technology to accurately locate aircraft using Time Difference
of Arrival (TDOA). Multilateration employs a number of ground satations, whcih are
placed in strategic locations around an airport.

Multilateration requires no additional avionics equipment, as it uses replies from
Mode A, C and S transponders, as well as military IFF and ADS-B transponders. Since
individual aircraft will be at different distances from each of the ground stations, their
replies will be received by each station at fractionally different times. Using advanced
computer processing techniques, these individual time differences allow an aircraft's
position to be precisely calculated.

204

--- Page 109 ---

USE OF AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM

Radar Applications.

The improved accuracy, integrity and reliability of satellite signals over radar
means controllers eventually will be able to safely reduce the minimum separation
distance between aircraft and increase capacity in the nation’s skies.

Radar vectors given to an aircraft will be related to magnetic headings only.
Radar control procedures will be used by ATC in preference to non-radar control
procedures whenever ATS or the aircraft served will gain operational advantage. The
following types of radar services may be provided to aircraft operating within reliable
radar coverage-

i) Radarcontrol service - for aircraft operating within controlled airspaces.
ii) Radar advisory service- for aircraft operating within Class F airspace

iii) Radar flight - for identified aircraft operating in any part of FIR
information service

The provision of any of the above types of radar service requires that aircraft
remain in direct two-way communication with the unit providing the service. However,
radar separation may be provided between two radar identified aircraft even when
only one of the aircraft is in direct communication with the radar unit.

Use of ATS surveillance service in air traffic control service.
> Provide of radar service to-

i) Improve airspace utilization ii) Reduce delays __ iii) Enhance safety

> Provide radar vectoring to-
i) Departing aircraft for expeditious and efficient departure flow and expending
climb to cruising level.

ii) Arriving aircraft for the purpose of expediting descent from cruising level
and establishing an expeditious and efficient approach sequence

iii) Aircraft for the purpose of resolving potential conflict
iv) Assist pilot in their navigation

> Provide separation and maintain normal flow when an aircraft is experiencing
communication failure is within area of ATS surveillance service coverage.

> Monitor the progress of air traffic in order to
i) Obtain improved position information regarding aircraft under control
ii) Obtain supplementary information regarding other traffic

iii) Detect significant deviations by aircraft from their assigned routings or
level.

205

AIR REGULATIONS

Use of Radar in Approach Control Service. Surveillance Radar is extensively
used in approach control to sequence the traffic, vector aircraft to position for pilot
interpreted approach aid and to do surveillance radar approaches.

Use of Radar in Aerodrome Control Service. Surveillance radar is used as
an approach monitor aid. Surface Movement Radar is used to control traffic on ground
in movement area.

Position indications may be displayed as:

a) individual position symbols, e.g. PSR, SSR, and ADS-B or MLAT symbols, or
combined symbols;

b) PSR blips; and
c) SSR responses.

Use of SSR without primary radar. Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR)
information may be used alone in the provision of separation between aircraft provided;
aircraft identification is established and maintained by use of discrete SSR codes.

Non-radar separation will be applied between transponder equipped aircraft
and an aircraft without SSR transponder or with a non-functioning SSR transponder.

In the event of an aircraft transponder failure or ATC determining that
transponder does not meet serviceability requirements, the aircraft (for whom carriage
of transponder is mandatory) will normally be permitted to continue to operate to the
next point of landing.

An aircraft (for whom carriage of transponder is mandatory) whose transponder
failure is detected before departure may be specifically authorised by ATC to operate
without serviceable transponder provided; a request is included in the flight plan.

ATS surveillance service Identification. Before providing ATS surveillance
service to an aircraft, radar identification shall be established by one of the method in
Doc 4444-PANS-ATM, and the pilot so informed. If identification is subsequently lost,
the pilot shall be informed accordingly and instructions will be issued so as to restore
non- ATS surveillance service separation.

ADS-B Identification Procedures. Where ADS-B is used for identification,
aircraft may be identified by one or more of the following procedures:

a) direct recognition of the aircraft identification in an ADS-B label;

b) transfer of ADS-B identification;

c) observation of compliance with an instruction to TRANSMIT ADS-B IDENT;

206

--- Page 110 ---

USE OF AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM

SSR and/or MLAT Identification Procedures. Where SSR and/or MLAT
is used for identification, aircraft may be identified by one or more of the following
procedures:

a) recognition of the aircraft identification in a SSR and/or MLAT label;

b) recognition of an assigned discrete code, the setting of which has been
verified, in a SSR and/or MLAT label;

c) direct recognition of the aircraft identification of a Mode S-equipped aircraft
in a SSR and/or MLAT label;

d) by transfer of identification;
e) observation of compliance with an instruction to set a specific code;
f) observation of compliance with an instruction to squawk IDENT;

PSR IDENTIFICATION PROCEDURES

Position Report Method:

By correlating a particular radar position indication with an aircraft reporting
its position over or as bearing and distance from, a point shown on the situation display;
and by ascertaining that the track of the particular radar position is consistent with
the aircraft path or reported heading.

Departing Aircraft Method:

By correlating an observed radar position indication with an aircraft which is
known to have just departed, provided that the identification is established within 1
NM from the end of the runway used. Particular care should be taken to avoid confusion
with aircraft holding over or overflying the aerodrome, or with aircraft departing from
or making a missed approach over adjacent runways.

The Turn Method:

a) Anaircraft maybe identified by ascertaining the aircraft heading, if circumstances
require, and following a period of track observation:

> — instructing the pilot to execute one or more changes of heading of 30 degrees
or more and correlating the movements of one particular radar position
indication with the aircraft’s acknowledged execution of the instructions
given; or

> correlating the movements of a particular radar position indication with
manoeuvres currently executed by an aircraft having so reported.

b) When using these methods, the radar controller shall:

i) verify that the movements of not more than one radar position indication
correspond with those of the aircraft; and

ii) ensure that the manoeuvre(s) will not carry the aircraft outside the
coverage of the radar or the situation display.

207

AIR REGULATIONS

Separation Minima. The separation minima specified shall only be applied
between identified aircraft when there is reasonable assurance that identification will
be maintained.

Procedural separation minima will be applied-

i) In the event of ATS surveillance service failure.
ii) In the area outside the ATS surveillance service coverage
iii) To aircraft leaving ATS surveillance service coverage or entering adjacent
FIR except where ATS surveillance service transfer is effected.
Separation minima based on ATS surveillance systems in India.
Please refer Chapter six for separation minima.

Separation minima based on ATS surveillance systems (ICAO).

Unless otherwise prescribed the horizontal separation minimum based on radar
and/or ADS-B and/or MLAT systems shall be 9.3 km (5.0 NM).

The radar separation minimum may, if so prescribed by the appropriate ATS
authority, be reduced, but not below:

a) 5.6 km (8.0 NM) when radar and/or ADS-B and/or MLAT capabilities at a given
location so permit; and

b) 4.6 km (2.5 NM) between succeeding aircraft which are established on the same
final approach track within 18.5 km (10 NM) of the runway end threshold. A
reduced separation minimum of 4.6 km (2.5 NM) may be applied, provided local
factors permit such reduction.

Wake turbulence radar separation minima. Please see chapter Special
Operational Procedures and Hazards.

Speed Control Procedures. All aircraft (including arrivals and departures),
operating below 10000 Ft will fly at IAS not greater than 250 Kt. All arriving aircraft,
operating below 10000 Ft within 15NM radius of VOR/ DME serving the aerodrome
will fly at IAS not greater than 220 Kt. Additional speed control restrictions may
be imposed for arriving and en-route aircraft by ATC whenever traffic conditions so
require. For further details, please refer AIP, India.

ATC may suspend speed control by using the phrase ‘No Speed restriction’ when
traffic conditions permit.

Termination of ATS surveillance Service. An aircraft which has been
informed that it is provided with ATS surveillance service should be informed
immediately when for any reason ATS surveillance service is interrupted or terminated.

ATS surveillance service is automatically terminated when an arriving aircraft
receiving ATS surveillance service has been instructed to contact tower frequency.
Position of aircraft from touchdown should be given to the aircraft before changing
over the aircraft to tower.

208

--- Page 111 ---

USE OF AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM

Procedure for operation of SSR transponder codes. All aircraft carrying
serviceable transponder shall operate the transponder at all times during flight within
Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati, Kolkata and Mumbai FIR regardless of whether the aircraft
is within or outside airspace where SSR is used for ATS.

Operating Procedures. Except as provided, pilots hall operate transponders
and select modes and codes in accordance with the following procedures-

i) Aircraft departing from an aerodrome located in Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati,
Kolkata and Mumbai FIR shall be assigned an appropriate SSR code on
departure. This SSR code setting shall continue unless instructed otherwise.

ii) Aircraft engaged in international flight, entering Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati,
Kolkata and Mumbai FIR shall continue to maintain SSR code being squawked
in the adjacent FIR.

iii) Aircraft engaged in domestic flight shall operate the transponder on the last
assigned code.

iv) Aircraft not assigned a SSR code shall operate transponder on mode A8 code
2000 before entry into Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati, Kolkata and Mumbai FIR and
maintain that code setting until otherwise instructed.

v) In order to avoid interference on radar display, the pilot shall not operate the
transponder when the aircraft is on ground except when entering the runway for
take-off or till vacating the runway after landing.

Verification of accuracy of mode C derived level information/ADS-B altitude
data transmission:

The tolerance value used to determine that pressure-altitude-derived level
information displayed to the controller is accurate shall be +60 m (+200 ft) in RVSM
airspace. In other airspace, it shall be +90 m (4300 ft), except that the appropriate
ATS authority may specify a smaller criterion, but not less than +60 m (£200 ft), if
this is found to be more practical. Geometric height information shall not be used for
separation.

> All aircraft must report the level/altitude maintaining/passing on first contact
with a radar unit to facilitate verification of Mode C altitude information/ ADS-B
altitude data transmission.

> Verification of the accuracy of SSR derived altitude/ ADS-B altitude data
transmission information displayed to the controller shall be effected at least once
by each suitably equipped ATC unit on initial contact with the aircraft concerned
or, if this is not feasible, as soon as possible thereafter. This verification shall be
effected by simultaneous comparison with altimeter derived level information
received from the specific aircraft by radio telephony. The pilot if the aircraft
whose Mode C derived/ ADS-B altitude data transmission information is within
the approved tolerance value will not be advised of such verification.

209

AIR REGULATIONS

If the displayed information is not within the approved tolerance value, or when
a discrepancy in excess of the approved tolerance value is detected subsequent to
verification, the pilot will be advised and requested to check his pressure setting
and confirm his level.

If, following confirmation of level and correct pressure setting, the discrepancy
continues to exist the controller may request the pilot to stop his Mode C
transmission. The phraseology used will be ‘Stop SQUAWK CHARLIE. WRONG
INDICATION”/STOP ADS-B altitude data transmission (wrong ).

210

--- Page 112 ---

USE OF AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM

QUESTIONS

The minimum radar separation to be provided to aircraft established on the
localizer course shall be:

A) 2.0NM between aircraft on adjacent localizer course

B) 2.5NM between aircraft on the same localizer course

C) 5.0NM between aircraft on the same localizer course

Unless otherwise prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority, the horizontal
radar separation minimum prescribed by ICAO shall be:

A) 3.5NM
B) 8NM
C) 5.0NM

Where ADS-B is used for identification, aircraft may be identified by the

following procedure:

A) Asking him to sqwuak aasigned mode A code C.

B) Direct recognition of the aircraft identification in an ADS-B label.

C) Recognition of an assigned discrete code, the setting of which has been
verified.

An aircraft is considered to be maintaining its assigned level as long as the
SSR mode C derived level information indicated that it is within:

A) _ +/- 500ft of the assigned level in non RVSM airspace

B) _ +/- 200ft of the assigned level in RVSM airspace

C) _ +/- 300ft of the assigned level in RVSM airspace

An aircraft in climb or descent is considered to have crossed a level when the
SSR mode C derived level information indicates that it has passed this level in
the required direction by:

A) _ +/- 300ft
B) More than 300ft
C) 300ft

Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR) information may be used alone in the

provision of separation between aircraft provided;

A) _ Instructions to pilot are acknowledged by him by making specific maneuver(s).

B) Aircraft identification is established and maintained by use of discrete SSR
codes.

C) It can not be used for providing separation.

211

10.

11.

12.

AIR REGULATIONS

Radar identification of a departing aircraft can be achieved if a radar blip is
observed within a certain distance from the end of the runway. Identification
has to be achieved within:

A) 1NM
B) 3NM
C) 5NM

Separation based on the use of MLAT position symbols and PSR blips shall be

applied so that

A) _ the distance between the centres of the position symbols and PSR blips,
representing the positions of the aircraft concerned, is never less than a
prescribed minimum.

B) the distance between the edges of the position symbols and PSR blips,
representing the positions of the aircraft concerned, is never less than a
prescribed minimum.

C) the distance between the furthest edges of the position symbols and PSR
blips, representing the positions of the aircraft concerned, is never more than a
prescribed minimum.

The air traffic control unit has reported “radar contact”. What does that mean
to the pilot?

A) _ The aircraft is subject to positive control

B) Position reports may be omitted

C) The radar identify of the aircraft has been established

When a RADAR operators says the following to an aircraft: “fly heading 030”,
the pilot must fly heading:

A) 030° magnetic in still air conditions (thereby flying the magnetic track)

B) 030° compass in still air conditions (thereby flying the compass heading)

C) 030° true, in still air conditions (thereby flying the true track)

Which code shall be used on Mode “A” to provide recognition of an aircraft
subjected to unlawful interference?

A) Code 7700

B) Code 7600

C) Code 7500

Upon intercepting the assigned radial, the controller advises you that you are
on the airway and to “resume own navigation”. This phrase means that:

A) _ radar services are terminated and you will be responsible for position reports
B) You are to assume responsibility for your own navigation

C) You are to contact the center at the next reporting point

212

--- Page 113 ---

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

USE OF AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM

What does the ATC term “radar contact” signify?

A) Your aircraft has been identified on the radar display and radar flight instructions
will be provided until radar identification is terminated

B) You will be given traffic advisories until advised that the service has been
terminated or that radar contact has been lost

C)  ATCis receiving your transponder and will furnish vectors and traffic advisories
until you are advised that contact has been lost

Where a “Secondary Surveillance Radar” (SSR) is not available, radar
identification may be achieved by one of the following procedures:

A) _ To instruct the pilot to execute one or more changes of 10°

B) _ To instruct the pilot to execute one or more changes of 45°

C) To instruct the pilot to execute one or more changes of 30° or more

When “Secondary Radar” is used, an aircraft may be identified by one of the

following procedures:

A) To request pilot to set transponder on position “OFF”

B) To request pilot to switch from “ON” to “STBY”

C) Observation of compliance with an instruction to operate transponder from
“ON” to “STBY” and back to “ON”

The Air Traffic Control Service: do not prevent collisions with terrain.
A) | Wrong, they do prevent collisions with terrain

B) Except when an aircraft is flying IFR in IMC

C) Correct, except when an IFR flight is vectored by radar

Which code shall be used on mode “A” to provide recognition of an emergency
aircraft?

A) Code 7600

B) Code 7500

C) Code 7700

One of the functions ensured by a radar control unit for the provision of

approach control service is:

A) To conduct surveillance radar approaches

B) To apply a horizontal separation less than 5NM

C) To provide instructions in order to reduce separations minima, if accepted by
the pilots

213

19.

20.

21.

AIR REGULATIONS

The primary duty provided by a radar unit is:

A) _ To assist aircraft on the location of storms

B) To provide radar separation

C) To assist aircraft where navigation appears unsatisfactory

What is meant when departure control instructs you to “resume own navigation”
after you have been vectored to an airway?

A) Advisories will no longer be issued by ATC

B) You are still in radar contact, but must make position reports

C) You should maintain that airway by use of your navigation equipment

All aircraft carrying serviceable transponder shall operate the transponder:

A) Atall times during flight, regardless of whether the aircraft is within or outside
airspace where SSR is used for ATS purposes.

B) Only when the aircraft is flying within airspace where SSR is used for ATS
purposes.

C)  Asand when required by the pilot.

214

--- Page 114 ---

USE OF AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM

ANSWERS

pt pep at ate Pe Prt ete {|
Bic{s}/site{tetatatct|s |

a[eTep el el ely] el ele lA
rc [B{A}/c{c}]cltc}]atspBicila |

215

AIR REGULATIONS

216

--- Page 115 ---

10

AERONAUTICAL
INFORMATION SERVICES

(ICAO ANNEX 15, PANS-AIM (DOC 10066), AIP, INDIA
AND CIVIL AVIATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 9 — AIR SPACE AND AIR NAVIGATION
STANDARDS SERIES ‘I’ PART | ISSUE Il)

GENERAL

The object of the aeronautical information service (AIS) is to ensure the flow of
aeronautical data and aeronautical information necessary for global air traffic
management (ATM) system safety, regularity, economy and efficiency in an
environmentally sustainable manner. The role and importance of aeronautical data
and aeronautical information changed significantly with the implementation of
area navigation (RNAV), performance-based navigation (PBN), airborne computer-
based navigation systems, performance-based communication (PBC), performance-
based surveillance (PBS), and data link systems and satellite voice communications
(SATVOICE). Aeronautical information provided in a standardized presentation
shall include the aeronautical information publication (AIP), AIP Amendments, AIP
Supplements, AIC, NOTAM and aeronautical charts.

Responsibilities and Functions
Aeronautical information service (excluding publication of Aeronautical

Information Circulars (AIC)) shall be provided by Airports Authority of India (AAI).
AIC shall be published by DGCA.

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION PUBLICATIONS (AIP)

AIP are intended primarily to satisfy international requirements for the exchange
of aeronautical information of a lasting character essential to air navigation. When
practicable, the form of presentation is designed to facilitate their use in flight.

AIP constitute the basic information source for permanent information and long
duration temporary changes.

217

AIR REGULATIONS

Contents

e An Aeronautical Information Publication shall contain, in three parts, sections
and subsections uniformly referenced to allow for standardized electronic data
storage and retrieval, current information relating to, and arranged under, those
subjects enumerated in Annex 15.

General Specifications

e A checklist giving the current date of each page in the Aeronautical Information
Publication series shall be reissued frequently to assist the user in maintaining
a current publication. The page number/chart title and date of the checklist
shall appear on the checklist itself.

° Operationally significant changes to the AIP shall be published in accordance
with AIRAC procedures and shall be clearly identified by the acronym — AIRAC.

2 AIP shall be amended or reissued at such regular intervals as may be necessary
to keep them up to date. Recourse to hand amendments or annotations shall be
kept to the minimum. The normal method of amendment shall be by means of
replacement sheets.

° The regular interval referred to shall be specified in the AIP, Part 1 — General
(GEN).

Specifications for AIP Amendments

« Permanent changes to the AIP shall be published as AIP Amendments.

° Each AIP Amendment shall be allocated a serial number, which shall be
consecutive.

e Each AIRAC AIP Amendment page, including the cover sheet, shall display an
effective date.

e When an AIP Amendment will not be published at the established interval or
publication date, a NIL notification shall be originated and distributed by the
monthly printed plain-language list of valid NOTAM.

Specifications for AIP Supplements

e Temporary changes of long duration (three months or longer) and information of
short duration which contains extensive text and/or graphics shall be published
as AIP Supplements.

e Each AIP Supplement shall be allocated a serial number which shall be
consecutive and based on the calendar year.

° AIP Supplement pages shall be kept in the AIP as long as all or some of their
contents remain valid.

e When an AIP Supplement is sent in replacement of a NOTAM, it shall include a
reference to the serial number of the NOTAM.

218

--- Page 116 ---

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

e A checklist of valid AIP Supplements shall be issued at intervals of not more
than one month. This information shall be issued through the medium of the
monthly printed plain language list of valid NOTAM.

e AIP Supplement pages shall be coloured in order to be conspicuous, preferably in
yellow.

° AIP Supplement pages shall be kept as the first item in the AIP parts.

° When an error occurs in an AIP Supplement or when the period of validity of
an AIP Supplement is changed, a new AIP Supplement shall be published as a
replacement.

Note. -- The requirements for NOTAM apply when time constraints do not allow
sufficient time for the distribution of an AIP Supplement.

Electronic AIP (eAIP).
The AIP, AIP Amendment, AIP Supplement and AIC should also be published
in a format that allows for displaying on a computer screen and printing on paper.

Note 1. -- This composite electronic document is named “Electronic AIP” (eAIP) and may
be based on a format that allows for digital data exchange.
NOTAM

NOTAM (N): Notam new

NOTAM (R): Notam replacement
NOTAM (C): Cancellation of Notam

TRIGGER NOTAM

The intent of this NOTAM is to serve as a reminder in the pre-flight informationc
bulletin (PIB) for the forthcoming operationally significant change in AIP (via AIP
supplement), if applicable.

When an AIP Supplement is published in accordance with AIRAC procedures,
a trigger NOTAM must be originated giving a brief description of the contents, the
effective date/time and the serial number of the AIP

Supplement. This NOTAM must come into force on the same date as the
supplement to which it refers. The text of the trigger NOTAM is included in the PIB to
ensure that pilots and operators are reminded that changes of operational significance
will take place as of a given effective date.

Origination
e A NOTAM shall be originated and issued promptly whenever the information
to be distributed is of a temporary nature and of short duration or when

operationally significant permanent changes, or temporary changes of long
duration are made at short notice, except for extensive text and/or graphics.

® The need for origination of a NOTAM shall be considered in any circumstance
which may affect the operations of aircraft.

219

AIR REGULATIONS

e The following information shall not be notified by NOTAM:

a) routine maintenance work on aprons and taxiways which does not affect
the safe movement of aircraft;

b) | runway marking work, when aircraft operations can safely be conducted
on other available runways, or the equipment used can be removed when
necessary;

c) temporary obstructions in the vicinity of aerodromes/ heliports that do not
affect the safe operation of aircraft;

d) partial failure of aerodrome/heliport lighting facilities where such failure
does not directly affect aircraft operations;

e) partial temporary failure of air-ground communications when suitable
alternative frequencies are known to be available and are operative;

f) the lack of apron marshalling services and road traffic control;

g) the unserviceability of location, destination or other instruction signs on
the aerodrome movement area;

h) parachuting when in uncontrolled airspace under VFR, when controlled,
at promulgated sites or within danger or prohibited areas;

i) other information of a similar temporary nature.

° At least seven days’ advance notice shall be given of the activation of established
danger, restricted or prohibited areas and of activities requiring temporary
airspace restrictions other than for emergency operations.

ry Whenever possible, at least 24 hours’ advance notice is desirable, to permit
timely completion of the notification process and to facilitate airspace utilization
planning.

e NOTAM notifying unserviceability of aids to air navigation, facilities or
communication services shall give an estimate of the period of unserviceability
or the time at which restoration of service is expected.

General Specifications

° Information concerning snow, slush, ice and standing water on aerodrome/
heliport pavements shall, when reported by means of a SNOWTAM, contain the
information in the order shown in the SNOWTAM Format.

r) Information concerning an operationally significant change in volcanic activity,
a volcanic eruption and/or volcanic ash cloud shall, when reported by means
of an ASHTAM, contain the information in the order shown in the ASHTAM
Format.

+ The NOTAM originator shall allocate to each NOTAM a series identified by a
letter and a four-digit number followed by a stroke and a two-digit number for
the year. The four-digit number shall be consecutive and based on the calendar
year.

220

--- Page 117 ---

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

e Each NOTAM shall deal with only one subject and one condition of the subject.

° A checklist of valid NOTAM shall be issued as a NOTAM over the Aeronautical
Fixed Service (AFS) at intervals of not more than one month using the NOTAM
Format specified. One NOTAM shall be issued for each series.

e Achecklist of NOTAM shall refer to the latest AIP Amendments, AIP Supplements
and at least the internationally distributed AIC.

° A monthly printed plain-language list of valid NOTAM, including indications of
the latest AIP Amendments, AIC issued and a checklist of AIP Supplements, shall
be prepared with a minimum of delay and forwarded by the most expeditious
means to recipients of the Integrated Aeronautical Information Package.

Distribution

° The originator shall select the NOTAM that are to be given international
distribution.

e Selective distribution lists should be used when practicable.

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION REGULATION AND
CONTROL (AIRAC)

General Specifications

° Information concerning establishment, withdrawal or significant changes upon
a series of common effective dates at intervals of 28 days, including 29 January
1998. The information notified therein shall not be changed further for at least
another 28 days after the effective date, unless the circumstance notified is of a
temporary nature and would not persist for the full period.

e The regulated system (AIRAC) shall also be used for the provision of information
relating to the establishment and withdrawal of, and premeditated significant
changes.

221

AIR REGULATIONS

INFORMATION TO BE NOTIFIED BY AIRAC
PART 1

The establishment, withdrawal of, and premeditated significant changes (including
operational trials) to:

e Limits (horizontal and vertical), regulations and procedures applicable to:

a) flight information regions;

b) control areas;

c) control zones;

d) advisory areas;

e) ATS routes;

f) permanent danger, prohibited and restricted areas (including type and
periods of activity when known) and ADIZ;

g) permanent areas or routes or portions thereof where the possibility of
interception exists.

* Positions, frequencies, call signs, known irregularities and maintenance periods
of radio navigation aids and communication facilities.

e Holding and approach procedures, arrival and departure procedures, noise
abatement procedures and any other pertinent ATS procedures.

° Meteorological facilities (including broadcasts) and procedures,

e Runways and stop ways.

PART 2

The establishment and withdrawal of, and premeditated significant changes to:

° Position, height and lighting of navigational obstacles.

e Taxiways and aprons.

° Hours of service: aerodromes, facilities and services.

° Customs, immigration and health services.

° Temporary danger, prohibited and restricted areas and navigational hazards,
military exercises and mass movements of aircraft.

e Temporary areas or routes or portions thereof where the possibility of interception
exists.

Provision of Information in Paper Copy Form

e In allinstances, information provided under the AIRAC system shall be published
in paper copy form and shall be distributed by the AIS unit at least 42 days in
advance of the effective date with the objective of reaching recipients at least 28
days in advance of the effective date.

222

--- Page 118 ---

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

Whene. er major changes are planned and where advance notice is desirable and
practicable, information published in paper copy form should be distributed by
the AIS unit at least 56 days in advance of the effective date.

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION CIRCULARS (AIC)

Origination

An AIC shall be originated whenever it is necessary to promulgate aeronautical
information which does not qualify:

a) for inclusion in an AIP; or
b) for the origination of a NOTAM.
An AIC shall be originated whenever it is desirable to promulgate:

a) a long-term forecast of any major change in legislation, regulations,
procedures or facilities;

b) information of a purely explanatory or advisory nature liable to affect flight
safety;

c) information or notification of an explanatory or advisory nature concerning
technical, legislative or purely administrative matters.

General Specifications

e AIC shall be issued in printed form.

° Both text and diagrams may be included.

© Originator shall select the AIC that are to be given international distribution.

e Each AIC shall be allocated a serial number, which shall be consecutive and
based on the calendar year.

° When AIC are distributed in more than one series, each series shall be separately
identified by a letter.

° A checklist of AIC currently in force shall be issued at least once a year, with
distribution as for the AIC.

Distribution

AIC selected for international distribution shall be the same as for the AIP.

Aeronautical Charts

The aeronautical charts shall, when available for designated international

aerodromes/heliports, form part of the AIP, or be provided separately to recipients of
the AIP.

Electronic aeronautical charts should be provided based on digital databases

and the use of geographic information systems. The chart resolution of aeronautical
data shall be that as specified for a particular chart.

223

AIR REGULATIONS

PRE-FLIGHT AND POST-FLIGHT INFORMATION/DATA

Pre-flight Information

At any aerodrome/heliport normally used for international air operations,
aeronautical information essential for the safety, regularity and efficiency of air
navigation and relative to the route stages originating at the aerodrome/heliport
shall be made available to flight operations personnel, including flight crews
and services responsible for pre-flight information.

Aeronautical information provided for pre-flight planning purposes at the
aerodromes/heliports shall include relevant:

a) elements of the Integrated Aeronautical Information Package;
b) maps and charts.

The documentation listed in a) and b) may be limited to national publications
and when practicable, those of immediately adjacent States, provided a complete
library of aeronautical information is available at a central location and means
of direct communications are available between the aerodrome AIS unit and

that library.
A recapitulation of current NOTAM and other information of urgent character
shall be made available to flight crews in the form of plain-language pre-flight
information bulletins (PIB).

TELECOMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS
NOTAM offices shall be connected to the aeronautical fixed-service (AFS).
The connections shall provide for printed communications.

Each NOTAM office shall be connected, through the aeronautical fixed service
(AFS), to the following points within the territory for which it provides service:-

a) area control centres and flight information centres;

b) —_ aerodromes/heliports at which an information service is established.

Digital Data Sets.

Digital data shall be in the form of the following data sets:

a) AIP data set;

b) terrain data sets;

c) obstacle data sets;

d) aerodrome mapping data sets; and

e) instrument flight procedure data sets.

224

--- Page 119 ---

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

Aeronautical Information Products.

Aeronautical data and aeronautical information provided either as digital data
sets or as a standardized presentation in paper or electronic media. Aeronautical
information products include AIP,AIC, NOTAMS, Aeronautical charts and Digital data
sets. Aeronautical information products are intended primarily to satisfy international
requirements for the exchange of aeronautical information.

NATIONAL PROVISIONS

The Aeronautical Information Service which forms part of Airports Authority of
India ensures the flow of information necessary for the safety , regularity and efficiency
of International and National Air Navigation within the areas of its responsibility as
indicated below. It consists of AIS Headquarters , International Notam Office (NOF)
and AIS units.

AIS HEADQUARTERS: Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi - 110 003
INTERNATIONAL NOTAM OFFICE (NOF)

Four International NOTAM offices are established at Mumbai , Calcutta , Delhi
and Chennai .
AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY

The Aeronautical Information Service is responsible for the collection and
dissemination of information for the entire territory of the India and for airspace over
the high seas under the jurisdiction of the India for air traffic control purposes .
AERONAUTICAL PUBLICATIONS

The Aeronautical Information is provided in the form of the integrated
Aeronautical Information Package consisting of the following elements

a. Aeronautical Information Publication (AIP)

b. Amendment service to the AIP (AIP AMDT )

c. Supplement to the AIP (AIP SUP)

d. NOTAM and pre-flight information bulletins (PIB)
e. Aeronautical information circulars (AIC) ; and

f. Check lists and summaries

NOTAMS and the related monthly checklists are issued via the Aeronautical
fixed service (AFS) , while PIB are made available at ATS Reporting office. All other
documents of the Package are distributed by mail.

Aeronautical Information Publication (AIP). The AIP is the basic aviation
document intended primarily to satisfy international requirements for the exchange of
permanent aeronautical information and long duration temporary changes essential
for air navigation

225

AIR REGULATIONS

Amendment service to the AIP (AIP AMDT). Amendment to the AIP are
made by means of replacement sheets, once in the ear in the month of April.

Supplement to the AIP (AIF SUP). The cl.ecklist of the AIP Supplements
currently in force is issued in the month of January of each year.

AIP Parts. The AIP is published in loose leaf form in English for use in
International and Domestic Operations .AIP India has been published in two volumes.
Volume I contains Part 1 — General (Gen) and Part 2 — En-route (ENR). Volume II
contains Part 3 — Aerodromes (AD). These parts contain following information:

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION PUBLICATIONS SHALL INCLUDE IN
PART 1 — GENERAL (GEN):

National Regulation And Requirements: Designated authorities, Entry,
transit and departure of aircraft, Entry, transit and departure of Passengers and
crew, Entry, transit and departure of Cargo, Aircraft Instruments, Equipment and
Flight Documents, Summaries of Indian Regulations and International Agreements/
Conventions, Differences from ICAO Standards, Recommended Practices and
Procedures.

Tables and Codes: Measuring systems, aircraft marking, holidays, Units of
measurement Time System, Geodetic Reference, Aircraft Nationality and Registration
Public Holidays, Abbreviation used in AIS publication, Chart symbols, Location
indicators, List of radio navigation aids Conversion tables, Sunrise/Sunset tables.

Services: Aeronautical information services: Responsible services, Area of
responsibility Aeronautical publication AIRAC System Pre-flight information service
at aerodromes. Aeronautical charts: Responsible service(s), Maintenance of charts
Purchase arrangements Aeronautical chart series available List of aeronautical charts
available.

Air traffic services: Responsible service Area of responsibility Types of services,
Minimum flight altitude ATS units address .

Communication services: Responsible service, Area of responsibility, Types of
service Requirements and conditions.

Meteorological services: Responsible service, Area of responsibility,
Meteorological observations and reports, Types of services, Notification required from
operators, Aircraft reports, VOLMET service, SIGMET service, Other automated
meteorological services.

Search and rescue: Responsible service(s), Area of responsibility, Types of
services, SAR agreements, Conditions of availability, Procedures and signals.

Charges for Aerodromes/heliports and Air Navigation Services:
Aerodrome / Heliport Charges, Air Navigation Services Charges.

226

--- Page 120 ---

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION PUBLICATIONS SHALL INCLUDE IN
PART 2 EN-ROUTE (ENR) :

General Rules and Procedures: Visual Flight Rules, Instrument Flight Rules,
ATS Airspace Classification, Approach and Departure Procedures, ATS Surveillance
Services, Altimeter Setting, Regional Supplementary Procedures, Air Traffic
Flow and Capacity Management Service, Flight Plans (PLN), Addressing of
Flight Plan Messages, Interception of Civil Aircraft Procedures, Unlawful
Interference, Air Traffic Incidents.

FIR / CTA / TMA, Other Regulated Airspace. ATS Routes, RNAV Routes,
Helicopter Routes, Other Routes, EN-ROUTE Holding.

Radio Navigation Aids/systems: Radio Navigation Aids & Systems, Special
Navigation Systems, Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS).

Navigation Warnings: Prohibited, Restricted and Danger Areas, Military
Exercise and Training Areas, Other Activities of Dangerous Nature, Air Navigation
Obstacles Enroute, Aerial Sporting and Recreational Activities.

EN-ROUTE Charts

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION PUBLICATIONS SHALL INCLUDE IN
PART 3 AERODROME (AD) :

Aerodromes / Heliports - Introduction

Aerodrome / Heliport Availability

Rescue and Fire Fighting Services and Snow Plan
List of Aerodromes, Heliports, Water Aerodromes
Grouping of Aerodromes / Heliports

Status of Aerodrome Licensing

VV VVV VV

Aerodromes

NOTAM and Pre-flight Information Bulletins (PIB)

NOTAMs are originated by the International NOTAM Office Mumbai, Kolkata,
Delhi and Chennai. NOTAMs are distributed in five series identified by the letters A,
B, C, D and G as follows:

Series A : Contain information in respect of Changes / unserviceability etc of
aeronautical facilities , likely to last for more than 2 hours , in respect of locations of
direct importance to International aircraft operations , requiring General International
Distribution .

Series B : Contain information in respect of Changes / unserviceability etc, of
aeronautical facilities , likely to last for more than 30 minutes but less than two
hours in respect of locations of direct importance to international aircraft operations ,
requiring limited distribution to adjacent stations only.

227

AIR REGULATIONS

Series C : Contain information in respect of changes / unserviceability , etc, of
aeronautical facilities in respect, of locations utilized by domestic flights only and for
which no separate. A’ series International distribution is given .

Series D : Contain information in respect of changes / unserviceability etc , of
aeronautical facilities in respect of locations of military controlled airfields utilized by
domestic flights the information of which is issued by AHQ through a VVO broadcast .

Series G : Contain information of general and lasting character affecting aircraft
operations in general. The series is operated only by the International NOTAM Office,
Delhi and issued under the authority of the The NOTAM of each series are allocated a
serial number by the respective NOTAM offices , Commencing with No.0001 preceded
by the designated letter of series A,B,C,D&G as the case may be at OOOOUTC on 1st
January every year.

Checklist and Summary of NOTAM

A checklist of all NOTAM current on the 1st of each month is originated by the
respective NOTAM office and transmitted over the AFTN to all the addresses on the
distribution list of their NOTAMs. In addition a monthly checklist and summary of
NOTAM in force at the end of the month is compiled and posted to those addresses.

The complete summary is prepared once a year on the Ist January, but the
summary for the subsequent months shall contain the text of only those NOTAMs,
which have been promulgated during the month of issue, and remain current on the
date of compilation.

Pre-Flight Information Bulletin (PIB)

Contains recapitulation of current NOTAMs and other information of urgent
character for the operator/ flight crews.Pre-flight Information is available at the
following aerodromes :

1. Kolkata 2. Chennai
8. Delhi 4, Mumbai
At any aerodrome normally used for international air operations, aeronautical
information essential for the safety, regularity and efficiency of air navigation and
relative to the route stages originating at the aerodrome shall be made available to
flight operations personnel, including flight crews and services responsible for pre-
flight information. The information provided includes information on departure
aerodrome, elements of the Integrated Aeronautical Information Package and maps
and charts.

Post-flight information. The purpose of post-flight information is to ensure
that malfunctioning/unserviceability of visual or non-visual aids or Airports Authority
of India Manual of Aeronautical information services any other facility essential to
the safety of flight operations observed by the Pilot during the flight are reported
without delay to the authorities responsible for those facilities. Similarly, presence of
birds and wild life hazards on or around the airport constituting a potential hazards
to aircraft operations, observed by a Pilot during the flight should be reported without

228

--- Page 121 ---

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

delay. This is to ensure that this information is made available for distribution as the
circumstances necessitate.

Automatic Self Briefing System (ASBS). Provides an automatic method of
receiving, storing and retrieving the data, essentially required for pilot’s pre-flight
briefing. It has the capability to include information pertaining to the stations and
routes concerned

229

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

Detailed description of meteorological information provided at the aerodrome
and an indication of which meteorological office is responsible, is in the
following part of the AIP

A) AD
B) RAC
C) MET

Achecklist of AIP supplements currently in force shall be issued at intervals of:
A) Not more than 2 months

B) Not more than 28 days

C) Not more than one month

Which of the following is information that is not given in AIP approach and
landing charts?

A) OCHorOCA

B) _ Visibility minima

C) DME- frequencies

An integrated aeronautical information package consists of the following

elements

A) _ AIP, supplements to AIP; NOTAM and PIB, AIC and checklist summaries

B) _ AIP, including amendment service; supplements to AIP, NOTAM and pre-flight
information bulletin (PIB), AIC, checklists and summaries

C) AIP, including amendment service; supplements to AIP, NOTAM, AIC and
checklist summaries

Temporary changes on specifications for AIP supplements of long duration and
information of short duration which contains extensive text and/or graphics
shall be published as AIP supplements. It is considered a long duration.

A) — Three months or longer

B) Two months or longer

C) One year or longer

Operationaly significant changes to the AIP shall be published in accordance
with:

A) _ AIC procedures and identified by the acronym AIC followed by a number

B) NOTAM procedures and identified by acronym NOTAM followed by a number
C) AIRAC procedures and identified by the acronym AIRAC

230

--- Page 122 ---

10.

11.

12.

13.

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

A checklist of NOTAM currently in force shall be issued at the AFTN at intervals
A) Not more than 28 days

B) Not more than one month

C) Not more than 10 days

quange in frequency or location of navigational aids on short notice is notified
rough:

A)  Notams
B) AIRAC
C) AIP

The contents of Aeronautical Information Publication (AIP) are:
A) GEN, ENR (en-route) and AD (aerodromes)

B) GEN, ENR, RAC, AD

C) GEN, AGA, COM, ENR, FAL

The SIGMET service, is in the AIP, in the following part:

A) AGA

B) GEN

C) MET

In which chapter of the AIP can you find a list with “location indicators”?
A) AGA

B) GEN

C) ENR

The informations on holding, approach and departure pro i
the following part of the AIP: P Procedures, are found in

A) ENR
B) MAP
C) AD

The closure of a runway for a year, because of maintenance, will be published:
A) Only inAIP

B) In NOTAM and AIP, inclusive Supplement

C) Only in NOTAM

231

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

AIR REGULATIONS

An AIRAC is:

A) An acronym for a system aimed at advance notification based on common
effective dates, of circumstances necessitating significant changes in operating
procedures

B) A notice distributed by means of telecommunication containing information
concerning the establishment, condition or change in any aeronautical facility
service, procedure or hazard, the timely knowledge of which is essential to
personnel concerned with flight operations

C) Apackage which consists of the following elements: AIP, supplements to the
AIP, NOTAM, AIC, checklists and summaries

Select the acronym corresponding to the following definition: an special
NOTAM series notifying, by means of a specific format, an important change
for the aircraft operations, due to a volcano activity, a volcano eruption or a
volcanic ash cloud.

A) GVATAM
B) ASHTAM
C) NAVTAM

The system notifying in advance the circumstances requiring important
changes in the methods of operation, based on common effective dates, is
identified by the acronym:

A) AIRAC
B) EATCHIP
C) FPS

The temporary, long-term modification (3 months or more) and the short-term
extensive or graphical information are published as follows:

A) AIP Supplements

B) Trigger NOTAM

C) NOTAM

The informations concerning charges for aerodromes/heliports and Air
Navigation Services are on the following part of the AIP:

A) AD
B) GEN
C) FAL

232

--- Page 123 ---

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

A notice providing information on Rules of the Air, Traffic Services and Air
Navigation Procedures and distributed in advance of its effective date is:

A) AnAIRAC

B) AnATS NOTAM

C) AnAdvisory NOTAM

A notice containing information concerning flight safety, air navigation,
technical, administration or legislative matters and originated at the AIS of a
State is called:

A) NOTAM

B) AIRAC

C) Aeronautical Information Circular (AIC)

In which section of AIP are contained information elements relating to
prohibited, restricted and dangerous areas?

A) AGA
B) ENR
C) GEN

In which section of AIP are contained information elements to refueling facilities
and limitations on refuelling services?

A) AD
B) GEN
C) SAR

In which section of the AIP are contained information elements relating to areas
and/or routes for which meteorological service is provided?

A) MET
B) GEN
C) RAC

Each contracting state shall provide an Aeronautical Information Service
(AIS) in its territory and for areas in which the state is responsible for the Air
Traffic Services outside its territory, and this shall include the preparation and
origination of:

A) Only AIP and NOTAM’s

B) AIP, NOTAM’s, Circular and AIRAC

C) — Integrated Aeronautical Information Package

233

25.

26.

‘AIR REGULATIONS

The identification of each prohibited, restricted and danger area shall be

composed by:

A) _ The nationality letters for location indicators assigned to the state or territory,
followed the letters P, R and D and figures

B) The letters P (Prohibited), R (Restricted) and D (Dangerous) for the area

concerned and figures
C)  Theletters P (Prohibited), R (Restricted) and D (Dangerous) followed by figures

NOF in India are established at:
A) All major aerodromes.

B) All international Airports
C) International Airports at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkatta and Chennai only.

234

--- Page 124 ---

AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

ANSWERS

pt t2 stats Pe Tz Tet 8 fo
pAtc}]s] eptatetsaitTatats |

I
pBiateai/atsaitatvtats fate |

21 | 22 | 23 | 24 | 25 | 26
pB iA; BI] c {alc |

» 235

AIR REGULATIONS

236

--- Page 125 ---

11

SEARCH AND RESCUE

(Annex 12, AIP, India, CIVIL AVIATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 9 AIR SPACE AND AIR NAVIGATION STANDARDS
SERIES ‘S’, PART | ISSUE Il)

Search and Rescue Services

Contracting States shall, individually or in cooperation with other States, arrange
for the establishment and prompt provision of search and rescue services within their
territories to ensure that assistance is rendered to persons in distress. Such services
shall be provided on a 24-hour basis.

Those portions of the high seas or areas of undetermined sovereignty for which
search and rescue services will be established shall be determined on the basis of
Regional Air Navigation Agreements.

Search And Rescue Regions

Contracting States shall delineate the search and rescue regions within which
they will provide search and rescue services. Such regions shall not overlap and
neighboring regions shall be contiguous.

Rescue Coordination Centres And Rescue Sub Centres
NATIONAL PROVISIGNS

Indian Government has assumed the responsibility of providing Search and
Rescue ( SAR ) cover in Indian Search & rescue regions (SRR). Search and rescue
services are provided over land areas by the National Aeronautical Search & Rescue
Coordination Committee (NASARCC) designating Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
as its chairman & over oceanic areas by National Maritime SAR Board (NMSARB)
designating Director General, Indian Coast Guard as its Chairman.

237

AIR REGULATIONS

Such services shall be provided within the entire Indian Territory including
territorial waters. Such services shall also be provided over those portions of the high
seas or areas of undetermined sovereignty for which responsibility of providing Search
& Rescue services has been delegated to India. The boundary of Indian Aeronautical
SRR coincides with Indian FIR boundary,. excluding the portion of FIR over the
sovereign territory of Kingdom of Bhutan.

Airports Authority of India coordinates SAR services through four rescue
Coordination Centres established at Delhi Mumbai, Kolkata & Chennai FIRs.

In areas over high seas, SAR services are provided by Indian Coast Guard through
three maritime Rescue coordination centres (MRCCs) located at Mumbai; Chennai &
Port Blair as promulgated in National Maritime Search & rescue manual.

Search & Rescue services over Indian Airspace excluding the oceanic areas are
coordinated by Airports Authority of India with the SAR agencies.

Search & Rescue services over Oceanic areas which form part of Kolkata, Mumbai
& Chennai FIR are provided by Indian Coast Guard.

In addition, various other departments of the Central and State Governments
such as Railways, Post & Telegraph, All India Radio, Police and District Collectors/
Magistrates, Municipal and Local bodies, Airline operators, Flying clubs, Professional
Pilots, Mercantile Marine, Port Trust and Armed Forces are available for search and
rescue missions when required.

Search And Rescue Equipment

Search and rescue units shall be provided with equipment for locating promptly,
and for providing adequate assistance at, the scene of an accident.

Each search and rescue aircraft shall be equipped to be able to communicate on
the aeronautical distress and on scene frequencies and on such other frequencies as
may be prescribed.

Each search and rescue aircraft shall be equipped with a device for homing on
distress frequencies.

Each search and rescue aircraft, when used for search and rescue over maritime
areas, shall be equipped to be able to communicate with vessels.

Many vessels can communicate with aircraft on 2182 kHz, 4125 kHz and 121.5
MHz. However, these frequencies, and in particular 121.5 MHz, may not be routinely
monitored by vessels.

Each search and rescue aircraft, when used for search and rescue over maritime
areas shall carry a copy of the International Code of Signals to enable it to overcome
language difficulties that may be experienced in communicating with ships.

_ Survival equipment, dropped by SAR and containing food and water will be
packed in containers and indicated by streamers of Blue colour.

238

--- Page 126 ---

SEARCH AND RESCUE

OPERATING PROCEDURES

Procedures for pilots-in-command at the scene of an accident

When a pilot-in-command observes that either another aircraft or a surface
craft is in distress,-the pilot shall, if possible and unless considered unreasonable or
unnecessary:

a) keep the craft in distress in sight until compelled to leave the scene or advised by
the rescue coordination centre that it is no longer necessary;

b) determine the position of the craft in distress;

c) as appropriate, report to the rescue coordination centre or air traffic services unit
as much information as possible: :

If the first aircraft to reach the scene of an accident is not a search and rescue
aircraft, it shall take charge of on-scene activities of all other aircraft subsequently
arriving until the first search and rescue aircraft reaches the scene of the accident.
Procedures for a pilot-in-command intercepting a distress transmission

Whenever a distress trahsmission is intercepted by a pilot-in command of an
aircraft, the pilot shall, if feasible:'

a) acknowledge the distress transmission;

b) record the position of the craft in distress if given;

c) take a bearing on the transmission;

d) inform the apprgpriate rescue coordination centre or air traffic services unit of
the distress fcarlguigsion, giving all available information; and

e) atthe pilot’s discretion, while ‘awaiting instructions, proceed to the position given
in the transmission.

SEARCH AND RESCUE SIGNALS

Signals with Surface Craft

The following man oeuvres performed in sequence by an aircraft mean that the
aircraft wishes to direct a surfdge craft towards an aircraft or a surface craft in distress:

a) circling the surface craft ‘at least once;
b) crossing the projected eburse of the surface craft close ahead at low altitude and:
1) rocking the wings; or
2) opening and closing the throttle; or
8) changing the propeller pitch.
Note:— Due to high noise level on board surface craft, the sound signals in 2) and 3) may
be less effective than the visual signal in 1) and are regarded as alternative means of
attracting attention.

239

AIR REGULATIONS

c) heading in the direction in which the surface craft is to be directed.
Repetition of such man oeuvres has the same meaning.

The following man oeuvres by an aircraft means that the assistance of the surface
craft to which the signal is directed is no longer required:

— crossing the wake of the surface craft close astern at a low altitude and:
1) rocking the wings; or
2) opening and closing the throttle; or
8) changing the propeller pitch.

Note:— The following replies may be made by surface craft to the signal:

— for acknowledging receipt of signals:

1) the hoisting of the “code pennant” (vertical red and white stripes) close up
(meaning understood);

2) the flashing of a succession of “T’s” by signal lamp in the Morse code;

3) the changing of heading to follow the aircrait.
— for indicating inability to comply:

1) the hoisting of the international flag “N” (a blue and white checkered
square);

2) the flashing of a succession of “N’s” in the Morse code.

Ground-air Visual Signal Code for use by Survivors

Symbol
[ese NT
Proceeding in this direction

240

--- Page 127 ---

SEARCH AND RESCUE

Ground-air Visual Signal Code for use by Rescue Units

No. Message Code Symbol
Symbol

Operation Completed L
We have found all personnel L |
We have found only some personnel

We are not able to continue. Returning
to base .

rc
—

BG

Have divided into two groups. Each
proceeding in direction indicated

1
3
5
Information received that aircraft is
in this direction
7

| 7 | Nothing found. Will continue to search

; Symbols shall beat least 2.5 metres (8 feet) long and shall be madeas conspicuous as
possible. Provide as much colour contrast as possible between signals and background.

Note L— Symbols may be formed by any means such as: strips of fabric, parachute
material, pieces of wood, stones or such like material; marking the surface by tramping,
or staining with oil.

Note 2:— Attention to the above signals may be attracted by other means such as radio,
flares, smoke and reflected light.
Air-to-ground signals

The following signals by aircraft mean that the ground signals have been
understood:
a) during the hours of daylight:

— by rocking the aircraft’s wings;

b) during the hours of darkness:

— flashing on and off twice the aircraft’s landing lights or, if not so equipped,
by switching on and off twice its navigation lights.
Lack of the above signal indicates that the ground signal is not understood.

241

AIR REGULATIONS

SATELLITE-AIDED SEARCH AND RESCUE

India has evolved a Satellite-aided Search and Rescue programme participation in
the COSPAS/SARSAT systems. It operates on 406MHz. Location accuracy is normally
within 5Km. The system will detect transmissions on this frequency throughout the
Indian Search and Rescue Region (SRR) and also SRR of Bangladesh, Myanmar,
Bhutan, Indonesia, Kenya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Nepal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Tanzania.

Under this programme two local user terminals (LUT) have been established,
at Bangalore and Lucknow, with the Indian Mission Control Centre (INMCC) at
Bangalore, which would be responsible for coordination with Rescue Coordination
Centres and other International Mission Control Centres.

The INMCC at Bangalore is connected with the RCCs at Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata
and Chennai through AFS network. Any distress alert received from the areas covered
is automatically transmitted to the RCC.

SAR agreements. At present India has SAR Arrangement with Royal
Government of Bhutan. India can seek SAR assistance from adjoining RCCs of other
nations in accordance with the bi-lateral agreement. For the purpose of SAR, the
authorities of the other State who wish their SAR units to enter the territory of India
shall transmit a request, giving full details of the projected missions and the need for
it.

242

--- Page 128 ---

SEARCH AND RESCUE

QUESTIONS

The units responsible for promoting efficient organization of search and rescue
service are:

A) Area control centre, flight information centre and rescue coordination centre
B) Rescue coordination centre and rescue sub-centres

C) Alerting centre and rescue coordination centre

Three aircraft, (1), (2) and (3) arrive successively at ten minute intervals,
overhead the scene of a recent aircraft accident.

- aircraft (1) is unable to establish contact with the Search and Rescue Centre
- aircraft (2) is able to contact the Search and Rescue Centre

- aircraft (3) is a Search and Rescue helicopter

The command of the situation is the responsibility of

A) (1), then by mutual consent (2) and then (3)

B) (1), and then by mutual consent to (3)

C) (1), then by mutual consent (2) until the completion of operations

What is the meaning of the symbol “V” in the ground air visual signal code for
use by survivors? -

A) Landing here impossible

B) Require assistance

C) Require medical assistance

What is the meaning of the symbol “LLL” in the ground air visual signal code
for use by rescue units?

A) Operation completed

B) Weare returning to base

C) We have found all personnel

Which of the following is NOT an international distress frequency?

A) 243.0MHz
B) 2182KHz
C) 2430KHz

An aircraft is flying over a mountainous region in which a search is being
carried out to find the survivors of an aircraft accident. The pilot sees a ground
signal in the form of an “X”. This indicates:

A) “All occupants alive”

B) “Need mechanical assistance”

C) “Need medical assistance”

243

10.

11.

12.

AIR REGULATIONS

At night an aircraft observes a luminous signal requesting help. To indicate

that he has received these ground signals, the pilot must:

A) Make at least one complete turn over the group of people in difficulty

B) Transmit, by luminous Morse signal, a series of the letter “R” using his
navigational lights

C) Switch his landing lights on and off twice or, if he is not so equipped, his
navigation lights twice

The color identification of the contents of droppable containers and packages
containing survival equipment should take the form of coloured streamers
according to the following code:

A) _ Red for medical supplies and first aid equipment

B) Black for food and water

C) Blue for blankets and protective clothing

COSPAS-SARSAT is:

A) Acommunication system linking all aircraft

B) Aspace system for the search of vessels in distress
C)  ASAR satellite-aided tracking system

You are flying in Mumbai FIR when you intercept a distress call. You record
the message and tell Mumbai FIC. The radio operator at Mumbai tells you to
standby. What should you consider doing whilst awaiting instructions?

A) Make a general call on 121.5 asking other airplanes to assist

B) Descend to low level and carry out a surface search for ships

C) Proceed to the position given in the distress message

Search and Rescue services within the territory of ICAO contracting states are
provided:

A) Ona 24 hour basis

B) | When the authority of the contracting state decides to do so

C) From sunset to sunrise

Contracting States shall establish a rescue co-ordination centre:

A)  Atevery ATS facility.
B) In each search and rescue region.
C) If they are adjacent to the sea.

244

--- Page 129 ---

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

SEARCH AND RESCUE

A Rescue Unit is:

A) Aunit assisting a RCC in SAR duties.

B) Aunit composed of trained personnel and provided with equipment suitable for
the expeditious conduct of SAR.

C) Aunit responsible for SAR service in co-operation with a RCC.

Which of the following statements regarding Alerting service is correct?

A) _ Aircraft in the vicinity of an aircraft known or believed to be the subject of
unlawful interference, shall be informed about this;

B) The Alert phase is established when no communication has been received
from an aircraft within a period of thirty minutes after the time a communication
should have been received;

C) Alerting Service and Flight Information Service are often provided by the same
ATS unit

Whenever a distress signal and/or message or equivalent transmission is

intercepted by the PIC of an aircraft, he shall:

A) _ Record the position of the craft in distress if given and if possible take a bearing
on the transmission

B) _ If possible take a bearing on the transmission

C) Record the position of the craft in distress if given

What is the meaning of SAR signal “N” when used by survivors on the ground:
A) Negative

B) Require medical assistance

C) Require assistance

Survival equipment, dropped by SAR and containing food and water will be
packed in containers and indicated by streamers of following colour:

A) green
B) blue
C) yellow

245

ANSWERS

[15 | 16 | 17 _|
Ata le |

AIR REGULATIONS

pi t2tsta ts [ot 7 fete} olay 2 [13 | 14
Biatselatcic{clajci}clales [ea {oc|

246

--- Page 130 ---

12

VISUAL AIDS FOR
NAVIGATION

(ICAO ANNEX 14, CAR SECTION-4,
AERODROME STANDARDS & LICENSING
SERIES ‘B’, PART | ISSUE I!)

INDICATORS AND SIGNALLING DEVICES WIND
DIRECTION INDICATORS (WDI)
Application
An aerodrome shall be equipped with at least one wind direction indicator.
Location

A wind direction indicator shall be located so as to be visible from aircraft in
flight or on the movement area and in such a way as to be free from the effects of air
disturbances caused by nearby objects.

Characteristics

Recommendation: Provision should be made for illuminating at least one wind
indicator at an aerodrome intended for use at night.

LANDING DIRECTION INDICATOR (LDI)

Location

Where provided, a landing direction indicator shall be located in a conspicuous place
on the aerodrome.

Characteristics

Recommendation: The landing direction indicator should be in the form of a ‘T’.

247

AIR REGULATIONS

SIGNALING LAMP

Application
A signaling lamp shall be provided at a controlled aerodrome in the aerodrome control
tower.
Characteristics

Recommendation: A signaling lamp should be capable of producing red, green and
white signals.

SIGNAL PANELS AND SIGNAL AREA

Location of signal area

Recommendation: The signal area should be located so as to be visible from all
angles of azimuth above an angle of 10° above the horizontal when viewed from a
height of 300 m.

Characteristics of signal area
The signal area shall be an even horizontal surface at least 9 m square.
Recommendation: The colour of the signal area should be chosen to contrast with

the colours of the signal panels used, and it should be surrounded by a white border
not less than 0.3 m wide.

MARKINGS

GENERAL

INTERRUPTION OF RUNWAYS MARKINGS

At an intersection of two (or more) runways, the markings of the more important
runway, except for the runway side stripe marking, shall be displayed and the
markings of the other runway(s) shall be interrupted. The runway side stripe marking
of the more important runway may be either continued across the inter7section or
interrupted.

Recommendation: The order of importance of runways for the display of runway
markings should be as follows:

1st: precision approach runway;
2na: non-precision approach runway; and
3rd: non-instrument runway.

At an intersection of a runway and taxiway the markings of the runway shall be
displayed and the markings of the taxiway interrupted, except that runway side stripe
markings may be interrupted.

248

--- Page 131 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

I onspicui
Runway markings shall be white.

Notes:—1. On runway surfaces of light colour, the conspicuity of white markings can be
improved by outlining them in black.

2. It is preferable that the risk of uneven friction characteristics on markings be
reduced in so far as practicable by the use of a suitable kind of paint.

3. Markings may consist of solid areas or a series of longitudinal stripes
providing an effect equivalent to the solid areas.

Taxiway markings, runway turn pad markings and aircraft stand markings
shall be yellow.

Apron safety lines shall be of a conspicuous colour which shall contrast with
that used for aircraft stand markings. Apron safety lines shall be located so as to define
the areas intended for use by ground vehicles and other aircraft servicing equipment,
etc., to provide safe separation from aircraft..

Apron safety lines shall be of red colour in India.
Recommendation: At aerodromes where operations take place at night, pavement

markings should be made with reflective materials designed to enhance the visibility
of the markings.

RUNWAY DESIGNATION MARKING

Application
A runway designation marking shall be provided at the thresholds of a paved runway.

Recommendation: A runway designation marking should be provided, so far as
practicable, at the thresholds of an unpaved runway.

Location
A runway designation marking shall be located at a threshold as shown in Fig. 1, as
appropriate.

Note:— If the runway threshold is displaced from the extremity of the runway, a sign
showing the designation of the runway may be provided for aeroplanes taking
off.

Characteristics

A runway designation marking shall consist of a two-digit number and on parallel

runways shall be supplemented with a letter. Ona single runway, dual parallel runways

and triple parallel runways, the two-digit number shall be the whole number nearest
the one-tenth of the magnetic North when viewed from the direction of approach. On
four or more parallel runways, one set of adjacent runways shall be numbered to the
nearest one-tenth magnetic azimuth and the other set of adjacent runways numbered
to the next nearest one-tenth of the magnetic azimuth. When the above rule would give

249

AIR REGULATIONS

a single-digit number, it shall be preceded by a zero.
In the case of parallel runways, each runway designation number shall be supplemented
by a letter as follows, in the order shown from left to right when viewed from the
direction of approach:

— for two parallel runways: ‘L’, ‘R’;

— for three parallel runways: ‘L’, ‘C’, ‘R;

— for four parallel runways: ‘L’, ‘R’, ‘L’, ‘R;

— for five parallel runways: ‘L’, ‘C’, ‘R’, ‘L’, ‘BR’; or ‘L’, ‘BR’, ‘VL, ‘C,, ‘BR

— for six parallel runways: ‘L’, ‘C’, ‘R’, ‘L, ‘C’, ‘R’.

RUNWAY CENTRE LINE MARKING

Application
A runway centre line marking shall be provided on a paved runway.

Location
Arunway centre line marking shall be located along the centre line of the runway
between the runway designation markings as shown in Fig. 1, except when interrupted

at the intersection of two or more runways.

vel

m i LIN
Be
TEE Uitte oso

A» General and all precision B - Paralial ninways
approach sunways
Fig. 1 Runway threshold markings for different runway width of Runways

t» Qptonal pattem

250

--- Page 132 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Characteristics

A runway centre line marking shall consist of a line of uniformly spaced stripes
and gaps. The length of a stripe plus a gap shall be not less than 50 m or more than
75 m. The length of each stripe shall be at least equal to the length of the gap or 30 m,
whichever is greater.

The width of the stripes shall be not less than:

— .0.90 m on precision approach category II and III runways;

— 0.45 mon non-precision approach runways where the code number is 3 or 4,
and precision approach category I runways; and

— 0.30 mon non-precision approach runways where the code number is 1 or 2,
and on non-instrument runways.

THRESHOLD MARKING

Application

A threshold marking shall be provided at the threshold of a paved instrument
runway, and of a paved non-instrument runway where the code number is 3 or 4 and
the runway is intended for use by international commercial air transport.

Recommendations:

1. A threshold marking should be provided at the threshold of a paved non-
instrument runway where the code number is 3 or 4 and the runway is
intended for use by other than international commercial air transport.

2, A threshold marking should be provided, so far as practicable, at the
thresholds of an unpaved runway.

Location
The stripes of the threshold marking shall commence 6 m from the threshold.

Characteristics

A runway threshold marking shall consist of a pattern of longitudinal stripes
of uniform dimensions disposed symmetrically about the centre line of a runway as
shown in Fig. 1(A) and 1(B) for a runway width of 45 m. The number of stripes shall be
in accordance with the runway width as follows:

Runway Width Number of Stripes

4
6
8
12

60 m 16

251

AIR REGULATIONS

Except that on non-precision approach and non-instrument runways 45 m or
greater in width, they may be as shown in Fig. 1(C).

TRANSVERSE STRIPE

Recommendation: Where a threshold is displaced from the extremity of a runway
or where the extremity of a runway is not square with the runway centre line, a
transverse stripe as shown in Fig. 2(B) should be added to the threshold marking.

A transverse stripe shall be not less than 1.80 m wide.

ARROWS

; Where a runway threshold is permanently displaced, arrows conforming to
Fig. 2(B) shall be provided on the portion of the runway before the displaced threshold.

When a runway threshold is temporarily displaced from the normal position, it
shall be marked as shown in Fig. 2(A) or 2(B) and all markings prior to the displaced
threshold shall be obscured except the runway centre line marking, which shall be
converted to arrows.

Fig 2 Displaced threshold markings

252

--- Page 133 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

AIMING POINT MARKING

Application
An aiming point marking shall be provided at each approach end of a paved
instrument runway where the code number is 2, 3 or 4.

Recommendation: An aiming point marking should be provided at each approach
end of:

(a) a paved non-instrument runway where the code number is 3 or 4,
(b) a paved instrument runway where the code number is 1
when additional conspicuity of the aiming point is desirable.
Location

The aiming point marking shall commence no closer to the threshold than the
distance indicated in the appropriate column of Table 1, except that, on a runway
equipped with a visual approach slope indicator system, the beginning of the marking
shall be coincident with the visual approach slope origin.

An aiming point marking shall consist of two conspicuous stripes. The dimensions
of the stripes and the lateral spacing between their inner sides shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the appropriate column of Table 1. Where a touchdown zone

Table 1. Location and dimensions of aiming point marking

Location and dimensions Landing distance available

800m up to 1200m up to
but not but not
including 1200m _including 2400m

Distance from threshold 250m
to beginning of marking

Length of stripe* 30-45m
With of stripe 6m

Lateral spacing between
inner sides of stripes

253

AIR REGULATIONS

i

B— With distance oading

Fig 3 Aiming point and touchdown zone markings

254

--- Page 134 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

TOUCHDOWN ZONE MARKING

Application
A touchdown zone marking shall be provided in the touchdown zone of a paved
precision approach runway where the code number is 2, 3 or 4.

Recommendation: A touchdown zone marking should be provided in the touchdown
zone of a paved non-precision approach or non-instrument runway where the code
number is 3 or 4 and additional conspicuity of the touchdown zone is desirable.

Location and characteristics

A touchdown zone marking shall consist of pairs of rectangular markings
symmetrically disposed about the runway centre line with the number of such pairs
related to the landing distance available and, where the marking is to be displayed
at both the approach directions of a runway, the distance between the thresholds, as
follows:

Landing distance available or the distance
between thresholds

less than 900m
900m up to but not including 1 200 m

Pair(s) of markings

1 200m up to but not including 1 500 m
1 500m up to but not including 2 400m

2 400m or more

255

AIR REGULATIONS

RUNWAY SIDE STRIPE MARKING
Application

Arunway side stripe marking shall be provided between the thresholds of a paved
runway where there is a lack of contrast between the runway edges and the shoulders
or the surrounding terrain.

Recommendation: A runway side stripe marking should be provided on a precision
approach runway irrespective of the contrast between the runway edges and the
shoulders or the surrounding terrain.

Location

Recommendation: A runway side stripe marking should consist of two stripes, one
placed along each edge of the runway with the outer edge of each stripe approximately
on the edge of the runway, except that, where the runway is greater than 60 m in
width, the stripes should be located 30 m from the runway centre line.

Characteristics

Recommendation: A runway side stripe should have an overall width of at least
0.9 m on runways 30 m or more in width and at least 0.45 m on narrower runways.

TAXIWAY CENTRE LINE MARKING
Application .
Taxiway centre line marking shall be provided on a paved taxiway, de-icing/anti-

icing facility and apron where the code number is 3 or 4, in such a way as to provide
continuous guidance between the runway centre line and aircraft stands.

Recommendation: Taxiway centre line marking should be provided on a paved
taxiway, de-icing/anti-icing facility and apron where the code number is 1 or 2, in such
a way as to provide continuous guidance between the runway centre line and aircraft
stands.

Taxiway centre line marking shall be provided on a paved runway when the
runway is part of a standard taxi-route and:

(a) there is no runway centre line marking; or
(b) where the taxiway centre line is not coincident with the runway centre line.
Location \

Recommendations:

1. Where it is necessary to denote the proximity of a runway-holding position,
enhanced taxiway centre line marking should be provided. The provision of
enhanced taxiway centre line marking may form part of runway incursion
prevention measures. Where provided, enhanced taxiway centre line marking
shall be installed at each taxiway/runway intersection. An enhanced taxiway
centre line marking shall extend from the runway-holding position Pattern A to a

256

--- Page 135 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

distance of up to 47 m in the direction of travel away from the runway.

Between two taxi holding Positions

Enhanced Taxyway Center line Markings

2. Ona straight section of a taxiway the taxiway centre line marking should be
located along the taxiway centre line. On a taxiway curve the marking should
continue from the straight portion of the taxiway at a constant distance from the
outside edge of the curve.

3. At an intersection of a taxiway with a runway where the taxiway serves as an
exit from the runway, the taxiway centre line marking should be curved into the
runway centre line marking, as shown in Fig. 4.

Characteristics

A taxiway centre line marking shall be at least 15 cm in width and continuous in length
except where it intersects with a runway-holding position marking or an intermediate
holding position marking, as shown in Fig. 4.

257

AIR REGULATIONS

ISOLATED AIRCRAFT PARKING POSITION

An isolated aircraft parking position shall be designated or the derodrome control

tower shall be advised of an area or areas suitable for the parking of ah aircraft which
is known or believed to be the subject of unlawful interference, or which for other
reasons needs isolation from normal aerodrome activities: ry a

Recommendation: The isolated aircraft parking position should be located at
the maximum distance practicable and in any case never less than 100 m from other
parking positions, buildings or public areas, etc. Care should be taken to ensure that
the position is not located over underground utilities such as gas and aviation fuel and,
to the extent feasible, electrical or communication cables..

RUNWAY-HOLDING POSITION MARKING

Application and location
A runway-holding position marking shall be displayed along a runway-holding
position. :

Characteristics

At an intersection of a taxiway and a non-instrument, non-precision approach
or takeoff runway, the runway holding position marking shall be as shown in Fig. 4,
pattern A. ;

Where a single runway-holding position is provided at an intersection of a taxiway
and a precision approach category I, II or III runway, the runway-holding position
marking shall be as shown in Fig. 4, pattern A. Where two or three runway-holding
positions are provided at such an intersection, the runway-holding position marking
closer (closest) to the runway shall be as shown in Fig. 4, pattern A and the markings
further from the runway shall be as shown in Fig. 4, pattern B.

The runway-holding position marking displayed at a runway-holding position
established at a position other than normal position, i.e. to avoid infringement of
obstacle limitation surface or interference with radio/navaids, it shall be as shown in
Fig. 4, pattern A.

INTERMEDIATE HOLDING POSITION MARKING

Application and location
Recommendations

1. An intermediate holding position marking should be displayed along an
intermediate holding position.

2. An intermediate holding position marking should be displayed at the exit
boundary of a remote de-icing/anti-icing facility adjoining a taxiway.

258

--- Page 136 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

INTERMEDIATE HOLDING
POSITION MARKING

Figure 4. Runway-holding position markings

Note.— Patterns Al and B1 are no longer valid after 2026.

259

Seu 5.2.10.4
and 4.12.2

AIR REGULATIONS

VOR AERODROME CHECKPOINT MARKING

Characteristics

A VOR aerodrome checkpoint marking shall consist of a circle 6 m in diameter
and have a line width of 15 cm (See Fig. 5(A)).

Recommendations

1. When it is preferable for an aircraft to be aligned in a specific direction, a line
should be provided that passes through the centre of the circle on the desired
azimuth. The line should extend 6 m outside the circle in the desired direction of
heading and terminate in an arrowhead. The width of the line should be 15 cm
(See Fig. 5(B)).

2. A VOR aerodrome checkpoint marking should preferably be white in colour but
should differ from the colour used for the taxiway markings.

A-— WITHOUT B—WITH
DIRECTION LINE DIRECTION LINE
Fig 5 VOR aerodrome check-point marking
AIRCRAFT STAND MARKINGS
Application

Recommendation: Aircraft stand markings should be provided for designated
parking positions on a paved apron and on a de-icing/anti-icing facility.

Characteristics

Recommendations:

1. Aircraft stand markings should include such elements as stand identification,
lead-in line, turn bar, turning line, alignment bar, stop line and lead-out line, as
are required by the parking configuration and to complement other parking aids.

2. An aircraft stand identification (letter and/or number) should be included in the
lead-in line a short distance after the beginning of the lead-in line. The height of
the identification should be adequate to be readable from the cockpit of aircraft
using the stand.

Lead-in, turning and lead-out lines should normally be continuous in length
and have a width of not less than 15 cm. Where one or more sets of stand markings
are superimposed on a stand marking, the lines should be continuous for the most
demanding aircraft and broken for other aircraft.

260

--- Page 137 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

APRON SAFETY LINES

Application

Recommendation: Apron safety lines should be provided on a paved apron as
required by the parking configurations and ground facilities.
Location

Apron safety lines shall be located so as to define the areas intended for use by
ground vehicles and other aircraft servicing equipment, etc., to provide safe separation
from aircraft.
Characteristics
Recommendations:

1. Apron safety lines should include such elements as wingtip clearance lines and
service road boundary lines as required by parking configurations and ground
facilities.

2. An apron safety line should be continuous in length and at least 10 cm in width.

ROADHOLDING POSITION MARKING

Application

A roadholding position marking shall be provided at all road entrances to a
runway.
Location

The roadholding position marking shall be located across the road at the holding
position.
Characteristics

The roadholding position marking shall be in accordance with the local road
traffic regulations.

MANDATORY INSTRUCTION MARKING

Application
Where it is impracticable to install a mandatory instruction sign, a mandatory
instruction marking shall be provided on the surface of the pavement.

Recommendation: Where operationally required, such as on taxiways exceeding
60 m in width, a mandatory instruction sign should be supplemented by a mandatory
instruction marking.

Location

The mandatory instruction marking shall be located on the left-hand side of the
taxiway centre line marking and on the holding side of the runway-holding position
marking, as shown in Fig. 6. The distance between the nearest edge of the marking

261

AIR REGULATIONS

and the runway-holding position marking or the taxiway centre line marking shall be
not less than 1 m.

Recommendation: Except where operationally required, a mandatory instruction
marking should not be located on a runway.
Characteristics

A mandatory instruction marking shall consist of an inscription in white on
a red background. Except for a NO ENTRY marking, the inscription shall provide
information identical to that of the associated mandatory instruction sign.

ANO ENTRY marking shall consist of an inscription in white reading NO ENTRY
on a red background.

Where there is insufficient contrast between the marking and the pavement
surface, the mandatory instruction marking shall include an appropriate border,
preferably white or black.

Recommendations
1. The character height should be 4 m.

2. The background should be rectangular and extend a maximum of 0.5 m laterally
and vertically beyond the extremities of the inscription.

A~ Taxiways of code letters A,B, C or B B ~ Taxiweys of code letters E or F

Fig 6 Mandatory Instruction Marking

262

--- Page 138 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

INFORMATION MARKING

Application

Where an information sign would normally be installed and it is physically
impossible to install a sign, an information marking shall be displayed on the surface
of the pavement.

Recommendation: Where operationally required, an information sign should be
supplemented by an information marking.

Location

Recommendation: The information marking should be displayed across the
surface of the taxiway or apron where necessary, and positioned so as to be legible
from the cockpit of an approaching aircraft.

Characteristics
An information marking shall consist of:
(a) an inscription in yellow, when it replaces or supplements a location sign; and
(b) aninscription in black, when it replaces or supplements a direction or destination
sign.
Where there is insufficient contrast between the marking and the pavement
surface, the marking shall include:
(a) ablack background where the inscriptions are in yellow; and
(b) a yellow background where the inscriptions are in black.

LIGHTS
GENERAL

Laser emissions which may endanger the safety of aircraft
To protect the safety of aircraft against the hazardous effects of laser emitters,
the following protected zones should be established around aerodromes.
— a laser-beam free flight zone (LFFZ)
— a laser-beam critical flight zone (LCFZ)
— a laser-beam sensitive flight zone (LSFZ)

Lights which may endanger the safety of aircraft

A non-aeronautical ground light near an aerodrome which might endanger
the safety of aircraft shall be extinguished, screened or otherwise modified so as to
eliminate the source of danger.

Lights which may cause confusion

Recommendation: Anon-aeronautical ground light which, by reason of its intensity,
configuration or colour, might prevent, or cause confusion in, the clear interpretation of
aeronautical ground lights, should be extinguished, screened or otherwise modified so

263

AIR REGULATIONS

as to eliminate such a possibility. In particular, attention should be directed to a non-
aeronautical ground light visible from the air within the areas described hereunder:

(a) Instrument runway code number 4: within the areas before the threshold and
beyond the end of the runway extending at least 4500 m in length from the
threshold and runway end and 750 m either side of the extended runway centre
line in width.

(b) Instrument runway code number 2 or 3: as in (a), except that the length should
be at least 3000 m.

(c) Instrument runway code number 1 and non-instrument runway:

within the approach area.

EMERGENCY LIGHTING

Application

Recommendation: At an aerodrome provided with runway lighting and without a
secondary power supply, sufficient emergency lights should be conveniently available
for installation on at least the primary runway in the event of failure of the normal
lighting system.
Note: Emergency lighting may also be useful to mark obstacles or delineate taxiways
and apron areas.

Location

Recommendation: When installed on a runway the emergency lights should, as a
minimum, conform to the configuration required for a non-instrument runway.

AERONAUTICAL BEACONS
AERODROME BEACON

An aerodrome beacon shall be provided at an aerodrome intended for use at night
if one or more of the following conditions exist:

(a) aircraft navigate predominantly by visual means;
(b) reduced visibilities are frequent; or

(c) it is difficult to locate the aerodrome from the air due to surrounding lights or
terrain.
Location
The aerodrome beacon shall be located on or adjacent to the aerodrome in an area
of low ambient background lighting.

Recommendation: The location of the beacon should be such that the beacon is not
shielded by objects in significant directions and does not dazzle a pilot approaching to
land.

264

--- Page 139 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Characteristics

The aerodrome beacon shall show either coloured flashes alternating with white
flashes, or white flashes only. The frequency of total flashes shall be from 20 to 30 per
minute. Where used, the coloured flashes emitted by beacons at land aerodromes shall
be green and coloured flashes emitted by beacons at water aerodromes shall be yellow.
In the case of a combined water-and-land aerodrome, coloured flashes, if used, shall
have the colour characteristics of whichever section of the aerodrome is designated as
the principal facility.

IDENTIFICATION BEACON

Characteristics
An identification beacon shall show flashing green at a land aerodrome and
flashing yellow at a water aerodrome.

The identification characters shall be transmitted in the International Morse
Code.

APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEMS
Application
Non-instrument runway

Recommendation: Where physically practicable, a simple approach lighting
system should be provided to serve a non-instrument runway where the code number is
3 or 4 and intended for use at night, except when the runway is used only in conditions
of good visibility, and sufficient guidance is provided by other visual aids.

Note:~ A simple approach lighting system can also provide visual guidance by day.
Non-precision approach runway

Where physically practicable, a simple approach lighting system shall be provided
to serve a non-precision approach runway, except when the runway is used only in
conditions of good visibility or sufficient guidance is provided by other visual aids.

Note:- It is advisable to give consideration to the installation of a precision approach
category I lighting system or to the addition of a runway lead-in lighting system.

Precision approach runway category I

Where physically practicable, a precision approach category I lighting system
shall be provided to serve a precision approach runway category I.

Precision approach runway categories I and III

A precision approach category II and III lighting system shall be provided to
serve a precision approach runway category II or III.

265

AIR REGULATIONS

SIMPLE APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM

Location

Asimple approach lighting system shall consist of a row of lights on the extended
centre line of the runway extending, whenever possible, over a distance of not less than
420 m from the threshold with a row of lights forming a crossbar 18 m or 30 m in length
at a distance of 300 m from the threshold. (Fig. 7)

The lights forming the crossbar shall be as nearly as practicable in a horizontal
straight line at right angles to, and bisected by, the line of the centre line lights. The
lights of the crossbar shall be spaced so as to produce a linear effect, except that when
a crossbar of 30 m is used, gaps may be left on each side of the centre line. These gaps
shall be kept to a minimum to meet local requirements and each shall not exceed 6 m.

The lights forming the centre line shall be placed at longitudinal intervals of 60
m, except that when it is desired to improve the guidance, an interval of 30 m may
be used. The innermost light shall be located either 60 m or 30 m from the threshold,
depending on the longitudinal interval selected for the centre line lights.

The system shall lie as nearly as practicable in the horizontal plane passing
through the threshold, provided that:

(a) no object other than an ILS or MLS azimuth antenna shall protrude through the
plane of the approach lights within a distance of 60 m from the centre line of the
system; and

(b) no light other than a light located within the central part of a crossbar or a
centre line barrette (not their extremities) shall be screened from an approaching
aircraft.

Any ILS or MLS azimuth antenna protruding through the plane of the lights
shall be treated as an obstacle and marked and lighted accordingly.

Characteristics

The lights of a simple approach lighting system shall be fixed lights. The colour
of the lights shall be such as té. ensure that the system is readily distinguishable from
other aeronautical ground lights and from extraneous lighting, if present. Each centre
line light shall consist of either: —
(a) asignal source; or

(b) abarrette at least 3 m in length.

266

--- Page 140 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

PRECISION APPROACH CATEGORY I LIGHTING SYSTEM

Location

A precision approach category I lighting system shall consist of a row of lights on
the extended centre line of the runway extending, wherever possible, over a distance
of 900 m from the runway threshold, with a row of lights forming a crossbar 30 m in
length at a distance of 300 m from the runway threshold.(Fig. 8).

Note:— The installation of an approach lighting system of less than 900 m in length may
result in operational limitations on the use of the runway.

The lights forming the crossbar shall be, as nearly as practicable, in a horizontal
straight line at right angles to, and bisected by, the line of the centre line lights. The
lights of the crossbar shall be spaced so as to produce a linear effect, except that gaps
may be left on each side of the centre line. These gaps shall be kept to a minimum to
meet local requirements and each shall not exceed 6 m.

Note:- Spacing for the crossbar lights between 1 m and 4 m is in use. Gaps on each side
of the centre line may improve directional guidance when approaches are made with a
lateral error, and facilitate the movement of rescue and fire fighting vehicles.

The lights forming the centre line shall be placed at longitudinal intervals of 30
m, with the innermost light located 30 m from the threshold.

The system shall lie, as nearly as practicable, in the horizontal plane passing
through the threshold, provided that:
(a) no object other than an ILS or MLS azimuth antenna shall protrude through the
plane of the approach lights within a distance of 60 m from the centre line of the
“system; and
(b) no light other than a light located within the central part of a crossbar or a
centre line barrette (not their extremities) shall be screened from an approaching
aircraft.
Any ILS or MLS azimuth antenna protruding through the plane of the lights
shall be treated as an obstacle and marked and lighted accordingly.

Characteristics
The centre line and crossbar lights of a precision approach category I lighting
system shall be fixed lights showing variable white. Each centre line light position
shall consist of either:
(a) a signal light source in the innermost 300 m of the centre line, two light sources
in the central 300 m of the centre line and three light sources in the outer 300 m
of the centre line to provide distance information; or

(b) a barrette.

267

AIR REGULATIONS

THRESHOLD

CROSSBAR
} dial LENGTH

4m
(3 m mim)
A— SINGLE SOURCE B —BARRETTE

Fig. 7 Simple Approach Lighting System

268

--- Page 141 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

i
:

SwOS RABANNE

Fig. 8 Precision App. Cat I Lighting System

269

20 contre lite beateattes ot D0 m beietene

AIR REGULATIONS

PRECISION APPROACH CATEGORY II AND IIT LIGHTING SYSTEM

Location

The approach lighting system shall consist of a row of lights on the extended
centre line of the runway, extending, wherever possible, over a distance of 900 m
from the runway threshold. In addition, the system shall have two side rows of lights,
extending 270 m from the threshold, and two crossbars, one at 150 m and one at 300
m from the threshold, as shown in Figs. 9 and 10.

The lights forming the centre line shall be placed at longitudinal intervals of 30
m, with the innermost lights located 30 m from the threshold.

The lights forming the side rows shall be placed on each side of the centre line,
at a longitudinal spacing equal to that of the centre line lights and with the first light
located 30 m from the threshold.

The crossbar provided at 150 m from the threshold shall fill in the gaps between
the centre line and side row lights.

The crossbar provided at 300 m from the threshold shall extend on both sides of
the centre line lights to a distance of 15 m from the centre line.

The system shall lie, as nearby as practicable, in the horizontal plane passing
through the threshold, provided that:

(a) no object other than an ILS or MLS azimuth antenna shall protrude through the
plane of the approach lights within a distance of 60 m from the centre line of the
system; and

(b) no light other than a light located within the central part of a crossbar or a
centre line barrette (not their extremities) shall be screened from an approaching
aircraft.

Any ILS or MLS azimuth antenna protruding through the plane of the lights
shall be treated as an obstacle and marked and lighted accordingly.

Characteristics

The centre line of a precision approach category II and Il lighting system for the
first 300 m from the threshold shall consist of barrettes variable white, except that,
where the threshold is displaced 300 m or more, the centre line may consist of signal
light sources showing variable white.

Beyond 300 m from the threshold each centre line light position shall consist of
eithe:: :
(a) a barrette as used on the inner 300 m; or

(b) two light sources in the central 300 m of the centre line and three light sources in
the outer 300 m of the centre line all of which shall show variable white.

270

--- Page 142 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

The side row shall consist of barrettes showing red. The length of a side row
barrette and the spacing of its lights shall be equal to those of the touchdown zone light
barrettes.

18 m~ 22.5 m
16 m preferable
—--~—
° Cay 2
tn? Som ox 62m
°
°

co
Og | og Runway osge tent
3

a
“Hate

Runway centre ine tg

|

E90 fight {7DZ)

°
be
°

i

°
o
e
°
°
o
q
e
°
°
°
2
°
%
$
°
o

900

ie Thenshckd tft Thresrota Bit

my spmting 3.0 tm max epecing 20 m man
Seg Corte ine barrete: L$ Canine tine barratte

I Ee~—-—— 8100 cow barron z Lc) a e———— Sie row sarratio:

a Ean rt cr to ke ak Ent nor sor

=

3

oo

Fig. 9 Cat IJ and III Precision Approach lighting systems

271

AIR REGULATIONS

VISUAL APPROACH SLOPE INDICATOR SYSTEMS

Application

A visual approach slope indicator system shall be provided to serve the approach
to a runway whether or not the runway is served by other visual approach aids or non-
visual aids, where one or more of the following conditions exist:

(a) The runway is used by turbojet or other aeroplanes with similar approach
guidance requirements.

(b) The pilot of any type of aeroplane may have difficulty in judging the approach due
to:

@ inadequate visual guidance such as is experienced during an approach over
water or featureless terrain by day or, in the absence of sufficient extraneous
lights in the approach area by night, or

Gi) misleading information such as is produced by deceptive surrounding
terrain or runway slopes.

(c) The presence of objects in the approach area may involve serious hazard if an
aeroplane descends below the normal approach path, particularly if there are no
non-visual or other visual aids to give warning of such objects.

(d) Physical conditions at either end of the runway present a serious hazard in the
event of an aeroplane undershooting or overrunning the runway.

(e) Terrain or prevalent meteorological conditions are such that the aeroplane may
be subjected to unusual turbulence during approach.

The standard visual approach slope indicator systems shall consist of PAPI and APAPI

systems. (See Fig. 10).

PAPI and APAPI

Description

The PAPI system shall] consist of a wing bar of four sharp transition multi-lamp
(or paired single lamp) units equally spaced. The system shall be located on the left
side of the runway unless it is physically impracticable to do so (See Fig. 10).
Note:— Where a runway is used by aircraft requiring visual roll guidance which is not
provided by other external means, a second wing bar may be provided on the opposite
side of the runway.

The APAPI system shall consist of a wing bar of two sharp transition multi-lamp
(or paired single lamp) units. The system shall be located on the left side of the runway
unless it is physically impracticable to do so (See Fig. 10).

Note:— Where a runway is used by aircraft requiring visual roll guidance which is not
provided by other external means, a second wing bar may be provided on the opposite
side of the runway.

272

--- Page 143 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

The wing bar of a PAPI shall be constructed and arranged in such a manner that
a pilot making an approach will:

(a) when on or close to the approach slope, see the two units nearest the runway as
red and two units farthest from the runway as white;

(b) when above the approach slope, see the one unit nearest the runway as red and
the three units farthest from the runway as white; and when further above the
approach slope, see all the units as white; and

(c) when below the approach slope, see the three units nearest the runway as red
and the unit farthest from the runway as white; and when further below the
approach slope, see all the units as red.

The wing bar of an APAPI shall be constructed and arranged in such a manner
that a pilot making an approach will:

(a) when on or close to the approach slope, see the unit nearer the runway as red and
the unit farther from the runway as white;

(b) when above the approach slope, see both the units as white; and
(c) when below the approach slope, see both the units as red.

Characteristics of the light units
The system shall be suitable for both day and night operations.

PAPI: A Pilot’s eye view
oca9 Too High
he High

oowe [\o Glide Path
coue/ \ sisrty Low

On Glide Path wena /_\(Too Low
[7] White Light
GE Red Light

Fig. 10: Precision App. Path Indicator Systems

273

AIR REGULATIONS

RUNWAY LIGHTING
Circling Guidance Lights

Circling guidance lights should be provided when existing approach and runway
lighting systems do not satisfactorily permit identification of the runway and/or
approach area to a circling aircraft in the conditions for which it is intended the runway
be used for circling approaches.

Circling guidance lights shall be fixed or flashing lights of an intensity and beam
spread adequate for the conditions of visibility and ambient light in which it is intended
to make visual circling approaches. The flashing lights shall be white, and the steady
lights either white or gaseous discharge lights.

Runway Lead-in Lighting Systems

Arunway lead-in lighting system should be provided where it is desired to provide
visual guidance along a specific approach path, for reasons such as avoiding hazardous
terrain or for purposes of noise abatement.

Each group of lights of a runway lead-in lighting system shall consist of at least
three flashing lights in a linear or cluster configuration. The system may be augmented
by steady burning lights where such lights would assist in identifying the system. The
flashing lights and the steady burning light shall be white. Where practicable, the
flashing lights in each group shall flash in sequence towards the runway.

RUNWAY THRESHOLD IDENTIFICATION LIGHTS

Application
Recommendation: Runway threshold identification lights should be installed:
(a) at the threshold of a non-precision approach runway when additional threshold

conspicuity is necessary or where it is not practicable to provide other approach
lighting aids; and

(b) where a runway threshold is permanently displaced from the runway extremity
or temporarily displaced from the normal position and additional threshold
conspicuity is necessary.

Location

Runway threshold identification lights shall be located symmetrically about the
runway centre line, in line with the threshold and approximately 10 m outside each
line of runway edge lights.

Characteristics

Recommendation: Runway threshold identification lights should be flashing
white lights with a flash frequency between 60 and 120 per minute.

The lights shall be visible only in the direction of approach to the runway.

274

--- Page 144 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

RUNWAY EDGE LIGHTS

Application
Runway edge lights shall be provided for a runway intended for use at night or
for a precision approach runway intended for use by day or night.

Recommendation: Runway edge lights should be provided on a runway intended
for takeoff with an operating minimum below an RVR of the order of 800 m by day.

Location
Runway edge lights shall be placed along the full length of the runway and shall
be in two parallel rows equidistant from the centre line.

Runway edge lights shall be placed along the edges of the area declared for use as
the runway or outside the edges of the area at a distance of not more than 3 m.

Recommendation: Where the width of the area which could be declared as runway
exceeds 60 m, the distance between the rows of lights should be determined taking
into account the nature of the operations, the light distribution characteristics of the
runway edge lights, and other visual aids serving the runway.

The lights shall be uniformly spaced in rows at intervals of not more than 60 m for
an instrument runway, and at intervals of not more than 100 m for a non-instrument
runway. The lights on opposite sides of the runway axis shall be on lines at right angles
to'that axis. At intersections of runways, lights may be spaced irregularly or omitted,
provided that adequate guidance remains available to the pilot.

Characteristics
Runway edge lights shall be fixed lights showing variable white, except that:

(a) in the case of a displaced threshold, the lights between the beginning of the
runway and the displaced threshold shall show red in the approach direction; and

(b) asection of the lights 600 m or one-third of the runway length, whichever is less,
at the remote end of the runway from the end at which the takeoff run is started,
may show yellow.

RUNWAY THRESHOLD AND WING BAR LIGHTS

Application of runway threshold lights
Runway threshold lights shall be provided for a runway equipped with run-

way edge lights except on a non-instrument or non-precision approach runway where
the threshold is displaced and wing bar lights are provided.
Location of runway threshold lights

When a threshold is at the extremity of a runway, the threshold lights shall be
placed in a row at right angles to the runway axis as near to the extremity of the
runway as possible and, in any case, not more than 3 m outside the extremity.

When a threshold is displaced from the extremity of a runway, threshold lights
shall be placed in a row at right angles to the runway axis at the displaced threshold.

275

AIR REGULATIONS

Threshold lighting shall consist of:
(a) onanon-instrument or non-precision approach runway, at least six lights;

(b) ona precision approach runway category I, at least the number of the lights that
would be required if the lights were uniformly spaced at intervals of 3 m between
the rows of runway edge lights; and

(c) onaprecision approach runway category II or IT, lights uniformly spaced between
the rows of runway edge lights at intervals of not more than 3 m.

Recommendation: The lights on a non-precision and precision approach runway
Cat. I should be either:

(a) equally spaced between the rows of runway edge lights, or

(b) symmetrically disposed about the runway centre line in two groups, with the
lights uniformly spaced in each group and with a gap between the groups equal
to the gauge of the touchdown zone marking or lighting, where such is provided,
or otherwise not more than half the distance between the rows of runway edge
lights.

Application of wing bar lights
Recommendation: Wing bar lights should be provided on a precision approach

runway when additional conspicuity is considered desirable.

Wing bar lights shall be provided on a non-instrument or non-precision approach
runway where the threshold is displaced and runway threshold lights are required but
are not provided.

Location of wing bar lights

Wing bar lights shall be symmetrically disposed about the runway centre line at
the threshold in two groups, i.e. wing bars. Each wing bar shall be formed by at least
five lights extending at least 10 m outward from, and at right angles to, the line of the
runway edge lights, with the innermost light of each wing bar in the line of the runway
edge lights.

Characteristics of runway threshold and wing bar lights

Runway threshold and wing bar lights shall be fixed unidirectional lights showing
green in the direction of approach to the runway. The intensity and beam spread of the
lights shall be adequate for the conditions of visibility and ambient light in which use
of the runway is intended.

RUNWAY END LIGHTS

Application
Runway end lights shall be provided for a runway equipped with runway edge
lights.

Note:— When the threshold is at the runway extremity, fittings serving as threshold
lights may be used as runway end lights.

276

--- Page 145 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Location

Runway end lights shall be placed on a line at right angles to the runway axis as
near to the end of the runway as possible and, in any case, not more than 3 m outside
the end.

Recommendation: Runway end lighting should consist of at least six lights. The
lights should be either:

(a) equally spaced between the rows of runway edge lights, or

(b) symmetrically disposed about the runway centre line in two groups, with the
lights uniformly spaced in each group and with a gap between the groups of not
more than half the distance between the rows of runway edge lights.

For a precision approach runway category III, the spacing between runway end
lights, except between the two innermost lights if a gap is used, should not exceed 6 m.

Characteristics

Runway end lights shall be fixed unidirectional lights showing red in the direction
of the runway. The intensity and beam spread of the lights shall be adequate for the
conditions of visibility and ambient light in which use of the runway is intended.

RUNWAY CENTRE LINE LIGHTS

Application
Runway centre line lights shall be provided on a precision approach runway
category IT or III.

Recommendation: Runway centre line lights should be provided on a precision
approach runway category I, particularly when the runway is used by aircraft with
high landing speeds or where the width between the runway edge lights is greater
than 50 m.

Runway centre line lights shall be provided on a runway intended to be used for
takeoff with an operating minimum below an RVR of the order of 400 m.

Recommendation: Runway centre line lights should be provided on a runway
intended to be used for takeoff with an operating minimum of an RVR of the order of
400 m or higher when used by aeroplanes with a very high takeoff speed, particularly
where the width between the runway edge lights is greater than 50 m.

Location

Runway centre line lights shall be located along the centre line of the runway,
except that the lights may be uniformly offset to the same side of the runway centre
line by not more than 60 cm where it is not practicable to locate them along the centre
line. The lights shall be located from the threshold to the end at longitudinal spacing
of approximately 15 m.

Note:— Existing centre line lighting where lights are spaced at 7.5 m need not be replaced.

277

AIR REGULATIONS

Recommendation: Centre line guidance for takeoff from the beginning of a runway
to a displaced threshold should be provided by:

(a) an approach lighting system if its characteristics and intensity settings afford
the guidance required during takeoff and it does not dazzle the pilot of an aircraft
taking off; or

(b) runway centre line lights; or

(c) barrettes of at least 3 m length and spaced at uniform intervals of 30 m, designed
so that their photometric characteristics and intensity setting afford the guidance
required during takeoff without dazzling the pilot of an aircraft taking off.

Where necessary, provision should be made to extinguish centre line lights or reset
the intensity of the approach lighting system or barrettes when the runway is being
used for landing. In no case should only the single source runway centre line lights
show from the beginning of the runway to a displaced threshold when the runway is
being used for landing.

Characteristics

Runway centre line lights shall be fixed lights showing variable white from the
threshold to the point 900 m from the runway end; alternate red and variable white
from 900 m to 300 m from the runway end; and red from 300 m to the runway end,
except that for runways less than 1800 m in length, the alternate red and variable
white lights shall extend from the midpoint of the runway usable for landing to 300 m
from the runway end.

Note:— Care is required in the design of the electrical system to ensure that failure of
part of the electrical system will not result in a false indication of the runway distance
remaining.

RUNWAY TOUCHDOWN ZONE LIGHTS

Application
Touchdown zone lights shall be provided in the touchdown zone of a precision
approach runway category II or III.

Location

Touchdown zone lights shall extend from the threshold for a longitudinal distance
of 900 m, except that, on runways less than 1800 m in length, the system shall be
shortened so that it does not extend beyond the midpoint of the runway. The pattern
shall be formed by pairs of barrettes symmetrically located about the runway centre
line. The lateral spacing between the innermost lights of a pair of barrettes shall be
equal to the lateral spacing selected for the touchdown zone marking. The longitudinal
spacing between pairs of barrettes shall be either 30 m or 60 m.

Note:— To allow for operations at lower visibility minima it may be advisable to use a 30
m longitudinal spacing between barrettes.

278

--- Page 146 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Characteristics
A barrette shall be composed of at least three lights with a spacing between the
lights of not more than 1.5 m.

Recommendation:— A barrette should be not less than 8 m nor more than 4.5 m in
length.

Touchdown zone lights shall be fixed unidirectional lights showing variable white.

SIMPLE TOUCHDOWN ZONE LIGHTS

The purpose of simple touchdown zone lights is to provide pilots with enhanced
situational awareness in all visibility conditions and to help enable pilots to decide
whether to commence a go-around if the aircraft has not landed by a certain point
on the runway. Except where TDZ lights are provided at an aerodrome where the
approach angle is greater than 3.5 degrees and/or the Landing Distance Available
combined with other factors increases the risk of an overrun, Simple Touchdown Zone
Lights should be provided. Lights shall be a pair of fixed unidirectional lights showing
variable white, located on each side of the runway centerline, aligned so as to be visible
to the pilot of a landing aeroplane in the direction of approach.

STOPWAY LIGHTS

Application
Stopway lights shall be provided for a stopway intended for use at night.

Location

Stopway lights shall be placed along the full length of the stopway and shall be
in two parallel rows that are equidistant from the centre line and coincident with the
rows of the runway edge lights. Stopway lights shall also be provided across the end of
a stopway on a line at right angles to the stopway axis as near to the end of the stopway
as possible and, in any case, not more than 3 m outside the end.

Characteristics
Stopway lights shall be fixed unidirectional lights showing red in the direction of
the runway.

279

AIR REGULATIONS

TAXIWAY LIGHTS

TAXIWAY CENTRE LINE LIGHTS

Application

Taxiway centre line lights shall be provided on an exit taxiway, taxiway, de-icing/
anti-icing facility and apron intended for use in runway visual range conditions less
than a value of 350 m in such a manner as to provide continuous guidance between the
runway centre line and aircraft stands, except that these lights need not be provided
where the traffic density is light and taxiway edge lights and centre line marking
provide adequate guidance.

Recommendation: Taxiway centre line lights should be provided on a taxiway
intended for use at night in runway visual range conditions of 350 m or greater, and
particularly on complex taxiway intersections and exit taxiways, except that these
lights need not be provided where the traffic density is light and taxiway edge lights
and centre line marking provide adequate guidance.

Note:— Where there may be a need to delineate the edges of a taxiway, e.g. on a rapid
exit taxiway, narrow taxiway or in snow conditions, this may be done with taxiway edge
lights or markers.

Recommendation: Taxiway centre line lights should be provided on an exit
taxiway, taxiway, de-icing/ anti-icing facility and apron in all visibility conditions
where specified as components of an advanced surface movement guidance and control
system in such a manner as to provide continuous guidance between the runway centre
line and aircraft stands. .

Taxiway centre line lights shall be provided on a runway forming part of a
standard taxi-route and intended for taxiing in runway visual range conditions less
than a value of 350 m, except that these lights need not be provided where the traffic
density is light and taxiway edge lights and centre line marking provide adequate
guidance.

Recommendation: Taxiway centre line lights should be provided in all visibility
conditions on a runway forming part of a standard taxi-route where specified as
components of an advanced surface movement guidance and control system.

Characteristics

Taxiway centre line lights on taxiway other than an exit taxiway and on a runway
forming part of standard taxi-route shall be fixed lights showing green with beam
dimensions such that the light is visible only from aeroplanes on or in the vicinity of
the taxiway.

Taxiway centre line lights on an exit taxiway shall be fixed lights. Alternate
taxiway centre line lights shall show green and yellow from their beginning near the
runway centre line to perimeter of the ILS/MLS critical/sensitive area or the lower edge
of the inner transitional surface, whichever is farthest from the runway; and thereafter
all lights shall show green (See Fig. 11). The light nearest to the perimeter shall always

280

--- Page 147 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

show yellow. Where aircraft may follow the same centre line in both directions, all the
centre line lights shall show green to aircraft approaching the runway.

Location

Recommendation: Taxiway centre line lights should normally be located on the
taxiway centre line marking, except that they may be offset by not more than 30 cm
where it is not practicable to locate them on the marking.

TAXIWAY CENTRE LINE LIGHTS ON TAXIWAYS

Location

Recommendation: Taxiway centre line lights on a straight section of a taxiway
should be spaced at longitudinal intervals of not more than 30 m, except that:

(a) larger intervals not exceeding 60 m may be used where, because of the prevailing
meteorological conditions, adequate guidance is provided by such spacing;

(b) intervals less than 30 m should be provided on short straight sections; and

(c) ona taxiway intended for use in RVR conditions of less than a value of 350 m, the
longitudinal spacing should not exceed 15 m.

Recommendation: Taxiway centre line lights on a taxiway curve should continue
from the straight portion of the taxiway at a constant distance from the outside edge of
the taxiway curve. The lights should be spaced at intervals such that a clear indication
of the curve is provided.

TAXIWAY EDGE LIGHTS

Application

Taxiway edge lights shall be provided at the edges of the holding bay, de-icing/
anti-icing facility, apron, etc. intended for use at night and on a taxiway not provided
with taxiway centre line lights and intended for use at night, except that taxiway edge
lights need not be provided where, considering the nature of the operations, adequate
guidance can be achieved by surface illuminated or other means.

Taxiway edge lights shall be provided on a runway forming part of a standard
taxi-route and intended for taxiing at night where the runway is not provided with
taxiway centre line lights.

Location

Recommendations:

1. Taxiway edge lights on a straight section of a taxiway and on a runway forming
part of a standard taxi-route should be spaced at uniform longitudinal intervals

of not more than 60 m. The lights on a curve should be spaced at intervals less
than 60 m so that a clear indication of the curve is provided.

2. Taxiway edge lights on a holding bay, de-icing/anti-icing facility, apron, etc. should
be spaced at uniform longitudinal intervals of not more than 60 m.

281

AIR REGULATIONS

TAXIWAY INTERSECTION

STRAIGHT TAXIWAY

RAPID
EXIT TAXIWAY

Runway center line light
and runway edge light

Taxiway edge tight
Taxiway centre tine light

» Exit taxiway centre line light

Stop bar light

Stop bar light
~ (undirectional)

Intermediate holding position light

' (Undirectional)

Fig 11-Taxiway lighting

282

[<= So mmax >|

e
°

6 0 8 o

°


--- Page 148 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

3. The lights should be located as near as practicable to the edges of the taxiways,
holding bay, de-icing/anti-icing facility, apron or runway, etc. or outside the edges
at a distance of not more than 3 m.

Characteristics

Taxiway edge lights shall be fixed lights showing blue. The lights shall show up
to at least 30° above the horizontal and at all angles in azimuth necessary to provide
guidance to a pilot taxiing in either direction. At an intersection, exit or curve the
lights shall be shielded as far as practicable so that they cannot be seen in angles of
azimuth in which they may be confused with other lights.

AIRCRAFT STAND MANOEUVRING GUIDANCE LIGHTS

Application

Recommendation: Aircraft stand maneuvering guidance lights should be provided
to facilitate the positioning of an aircraft on an aircraft stand on a paved apron or
on a de-icing/anti-icing facility intended for use in poor visibility conditions, unless
adequate guidance is provided by other means.

Location

Aircraft stand maneuvering guidance lights shall be collocated with the aircraft
stand markings.

Characteristics

Aircraft stand maneuvering guidance lights, other than those indicating a stop
position, shall be fixed yellow lights, visible throughout the segments within which
they are intended to provide guidance.

Recommendation: The lights used to delineate lead-in, turning and lead-out lines
should be spaced at intervals of not more than 7.5 m on curves and 15 m on straight
sections.

The lights indicating a stop position shall be fixed, unidirectional lights, showing red.

283

AIR REGULATIONS

RAPID EXIT TAXTIWAY INDICATOR LIGHTS (RETILS)

RETILs provide guidance on distance to go to the nearest rapid exit taxiway.

Rapid exit taxiway indicator lights (RETILS) te —=Runway centre fine

Fig 12-RETILS

RUNWAY TURN PAD LIGHTS

These provide continuous guidance on a runway turn pad to complete a 180-degree
turn and align with runway centre line.

Stop Bars

Note:— Runway incursions may take place in all visibility or weather conditions. The
provision of stop bars at runway holding positions and their use at night and in visibility
conditions greater than 550m runway visual range can form part of effective runway
incursion prevention measures. A stop bar is intended to be controlled either manually
or automatically by air traffic services.

A stop bar shall be provided at every runway-holding position serving a runway
when it is intended that the runway will be used in runway visual range conditions
less than a value of 350 m.

Intermediate holding position lights

Except where a stop bar has been installed, intermediate holding position lights
shall be provided at an intermediate holding position intended for use in runway visual
range conditions less than a value of 350 m.

Runway status lights and Autonomous runway incursion system

ARIWS shall provide autonomous detection of a potential incursion or of the
occupancy of an active runway and a direct warning to a flight crew or vehicle. When
an aircraft is departing from a runway (rolling) or arriving at a runway (short final),
red warning lights at the entrances will illuminate, indicating that it is unsafe to enter
or cross the runway. When an aircraft is aligned on the runway for take-off and another
aircraft or vehicle enters or crosses the runway, red warning lights will illuminate at
the threshold area, indicating that is unsafe to start the take-off roll.

284

--- Page 149 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Runway status lights (RWSL) is a type of autonomous runway warning system
(ARIWS).

The two basic visual components of RWSL are runway entrance lights (RELs) and
take-off hold lights (THLs).

Either components may be installed by itself, but the two components are designed
to be complementary to each other. Where provided, RELs shall consist of a single line
of fixed in patement lights showing red in the direction of aircraft approaching the
runway.

Runway Guard Lights
Note:— The purpose of runway guard lights is to warn pilots, and drivers of vehicles
when they are operating on taxiways, that they are about to enter runway.

If stop bars are not provided, Runway guard lights, Configuration A, shall be
provided at each taxiway/runway intersection associated with a runway intended for
use in:

a) runway visual range conditions less than a value of 550 m where a stop bar is not
installed

b) runway visual range conditions of values between 550 m and 1,200 m. where the
traffic density is heavy.

Signs
Signs shall be provided to convey a mandatory instruction, information on a

specific location or destination on a movement area or to provide other information to
meet the requirements .

A variable message sign should be provided where:

a) the instruction or information displayed on the sign is relevant only during a
certain period of time; and/or

b) there is a need for variable pre-determined information to be displayed on the
sign to meet the requirements .

Signs shall be frangible. Those located near a runway or taxiway shall be
sufficiently low to preserve clearance for propellers and the engine pods of jet aircraft.
The installed height of the sign shall not exceed the dimension specified with the longer
side horizontal.

The only signs on the movement area utilizing red shall be mandatory instruction
signs.

Signs shall be retro reflective and/or illuminated when intended for use at night
in association with non-instrument runways where the code number is 1 or 2.

285

AIR REGULATIONS

Mandatory Instruction Signs

A mandatory instruction sign shall be provided to identify a location beyond which
an aircraft taxiing or vehicle shall not proceed unless authorized by the aerodrome
control tower.

Mandatory instruction signs shall include runway designation signs, category I,
II or III holding position signs, runway-holding position signs, road-holding position
signs and NO ENTRY signs.

A NO ENTRY sign shall be provided when entry into an area is prohibited.
A mandatory instruction sign shall consist of an inscription in white on a red
background.

Where, owing to environmental or other factors, the conspicuity of the inscription
on a mandatory instruction sign needs to be enhanced, the outside edge of the white
inscription shall be supplemented by a black outline measuring 10 mm in width for
runway code numbers 1 and 2, and 20 mm in width for runway code numbers 3 and 4.

NON-INSTRUMENT, HON-PRECISION PRECISION APPROACH RUNWAYS
TAKE-OFF RUNWAYS,

(caresoRva a

Fig 13-Mandatory Instruction Signs

Information Signs
An information sign shall be provided where there is an operational need to
identify by a sign, a specific location, or routing (direction or destination) information.

Information signs shall include: direction signs, location signs, destination signs,
runway exit signs, runway vacated signs and intersection take-off signs.

Arunway exit sign shall be provided where there is an operational need to identify
a runway exit.

A runway vacated sign shall be provided where the exit taxiway is not provided

with taxiway centre line lights and there is need to indicate to a pilot leaving a runway
the perimeter of the ILS/MLS critical/sensitive area or the lower edge of the inner

286

--- Page 150 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

DIRECTION/LOCATION/DIRECTION LOCATION DIRECTION

LOCATION RUNWAY VACATED RUNWAY VACATED LOCATION DESTINATION

Indicating
Intersection

RUNWAY EXIT RUNWAY EXIT

INTERSECTION TAKE-OFF DIRECTION LOCATION DIRECTION DIRECTION

Location Signs

Fig 14-Information Signs

transitional surface whichever is farther from the runway centre line.

An intersection take-off sign shall be provided when there is an operational need
to indicate the remaining take-off run available (TORA) for intersection take-offs.

Where necessary, a destination sign should be provided to indicate the direction
to a specific destination on the aerodrome, such as cargo area, general aviation, etc.

A combined location and direction sign shall be provided when it is intended to
indicate routing information prior to a taxiway intersection.

A direction sign shall be provided when there is an operational need to identify
the designation and direction of taxiways at an intersection.
Location Sign

A location sign should be provided at an intermediate holding position.

A location sign shall be provided in conjunction with a runway designation sign
except at a runway/runway intersection.

A location sign shall be provided in conjunction with a direction sign, except that
it may be omitted where an aeronautical study indicates that it is not needed.

Where a taxiway ends at an intersection such as a “T” and it is necessary to
identify this, a barricade, direction sign and/or other appropriate visual aid shall be
used.

An information sign other than a location sign shall consist of an inscription in
black on a yellow background.

A location sign shall consist of an inscription in yellow on a black background and
where it is a stand-alone sign shall have a yellow border. Remember “Black Square,
you are there.”

287

AIR REGULATIONS

The use of numbers alone on the maneuvering area shall be reserved for the
designation of runways.
VOR aerodrome check-point sign
When a VOR aerodrome check-point is established, it shall be indicated by a VOR
aerodrome check-point marking and sign.

A VOR aerodrome check-point sign shall consist of an inscription in black on a yellow
background.

Aerodrome identification sign

An aerodrome identification sign shall be provided at an aerodrome where there
is insufficient alternative means of visual identification of aerodrome.

The aerodrome identification sign shall be placed on the aerodrome so as to be
legible, in so far as is practicable, at all angles above the horizontal.

The aerodrome identification sign shall consist of the name of the aerodrome.

The colour selected for the sign shall give adequate conspicuity when viewed
against its background.

The characters shall have a height of not less than 3 m.

Aircraft stand identification signs
An aircraft stand identification marking shall be supplemented with an aircraft
stand identification sign where feasible.

An aircraft stand identification sign shall consist of an inscription in black on a
yellow background.

Road-holding position sign
A road-holding position sign shall be provided at all road entrances to a runway.

The road-holding position sign shall be located 1.5 m from one edge of the road
(left or right as appropriate to the local traffic regulations) at the holding position.

A road-holding position sign shall consist of an inscription in white on a red
background.

288

--- Page 151 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

MARKERS

General

Markers shall be frangible. Those located near a runway or taxiway shall be sufficiently
low to preserve clearance for propellers and for the engine pods of jet aircraft.
Unpaved runway edge markers

Markers shall be provided when the extent of an unpaved runway is not clearly
indicated by the appearance of its surface compared with that of the surrounding
ground.

Stopway Edge Markers

Stopway edge markers should be provided when the extent of a stopway is not
clearly indicated by its appearance compared with that of the surrounding ground.

The stopway edge markers shall be sufficiently different from any runway edge
markers used to ensure that the two types of markers cannot be confused.
Edge Markers for snow-covered Runways
a Edge markers for snow covered runways should be used to indicate the usable
limits of a snow-covered runway when the limits are not otherwise indicated.
Taxiway Edge Markers

Taxiway edge markers should be provided on a taxiway where the code number
is 1 or 2 and taxiway centre line or edge lights or taxiway centre line markers are not
provided.

Unpaved Taxiway Edge Markers

Where the extent of an unpaved taxiway is not clearly indicated by its appearance
compared with that of the surrounding ground, markers should be provided.

Boundary Markers

Boundary markers shall be provided at an aerodrome where the landing area
has no runway. The markers shall be coloured to contrast with the background against
which they will be seen. A single colour, orange or red, or two contrasting colours,
orange and white or alternatively red and white, shall be used, except where such
colours merge with the background.

289

ATR REGULATIONS

VISUAL AIDS FOR DENOTING OBSTACLES

Objects to be marked and/or lighted

A fixed obstacle that extends above a take-off climb surface within 3,000 m of the
inner edge of the take-off climb surface shall be marked and, if the runway is used at
night, lighted.

A fixed object, other than an obstacle, adjacent to a take-off climb surface shall be
marked and, if the runway is used at night, lighted.

A fixed obstacle above a horizontal surface shall be marked and, if the aerodrome
is used at night, lighted.

A fixed object that extends above an obstacle protection surface shall be marked
and, if the runway is used at night, lighted.

Vehicles and other mobile objects, excluding aircraft, on the movement area of an
aerodrome are obstacles and shall be marked and, if the vehicles and aerodrome are
used at night or in conditions of low visibility, lighted, except that aircraft servicing
equipment and vehicles used only on aprons may be exempt.

Elevated aeronautical ground lights within the movement area shall be marked
so as to be conspicuous by day. Obstacle lights shall not be installed on elevated ground
lights or signs in the movement area.

All obstacles within the distance specified, from the centre line of a taxiway, an
apron taxiway or aircraft stand taxi lane shall be marked and, if the taxiway, apron
taxiway or aircraft stand taxi lane is used at night, lighted.

Obstacles should be marked and lighted, except that the marking may be omitted
when high-intensity obstacle lights by day light the obstacle.

Marking of Objects

All fixed objects to be marked shall, whenever practicable, be colored, but if this
is not practicable, markers or flags shall be displayed on or above them, except that
objects that are sufficiently conspicuous by their shape, size or colour need not be
otherwise marked.

All mobile objects to be marked shall be coloured or display flags.

An object shall be coloured to show a chequered pattern if it has essentially
unbroken surfaces and its projection on any vertical plane equals or exceeds 4.5 m in
both dimensions.

The pattern should consist of rectangles of not less than 1.5 m and not more than
3 m on a side, the corners being of the darker colour. The colours of the pattern should
contrast each with the other and with the background against which they will be seen.
Orange and white or alternatively red and white should be used, except where such
colours merge with the background. (See Figure 15)

290

--- Page 152 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Plain roof pattem
Curved surface

Skelaton structure 1 ight spacing (x) in accordance with Appendix 6

Number of levels-of lights = N = Y (metres)
X (metres)

Roof top pattern | i

Note;— H Is less than 45m for the examples shown above.
For greater heights intermediete lights must be added as shown below,

- ; ” Fig 15-Obstacle Marking

An object should be coloured in a single conspicuous colour if its projection on
any vertical plane has both dimensions less than 1.5 m. Orange or red should be used,
except where such colours merge with the background.

When mobile objects are marked by red colour for emergency vehicles and yellow for
service vehicles shall be used.

USE OF MARKERS

Markers displayed on or adjacent to objects shall be located in conspicuous
positions so as to retain the general definition of the object and shall be recognizable
in clear weather from a distance of at least 1000 m for an object to be viewed from the
air and 300 m for an object to be viewed from the ground in all directions in which an
aircraft is likely to approach the object. The shape of markers shall be distinctive to the
extent necessary to ensure that they are not mistaken for markers employed to convey
other information, and they shall be such that the hazard presented by the object they
mark is not increased.

LIGHTING OF OBJECTS

Use of obstacle lights

The presence of objects which must be lighted, shall be indicated by low-, medium-
or high-intensity obstacle lights, or a combination of such lights.

Location of obstacle lights
One or more low-, medium- or high-intensity obstacle lights shall be located, The
lights should be so arranged as to depict the outline of the object.

291

AIR REGULATIONS

Fig 16-Obstacle Lighting

Low-intensity obstacle light

Low-intensity obstacle lights on fixed objects, shall be fixed-red lights, they shall
be spaced at longitudinal intervals not exceeding 45 m.

Low-intensity obstacle lights, displayed on vehicles associated with emergency or
security shall be flashing-blue and those displayed on other vehicles shall be flashing-
yellow.

Low-intensity obstacle lights displayed on follow-me vehicles shall be flashing
yellow.

Medium-intensity obstacle light

They shall be spaced at longitudinal intervals not exceeding 900 m. Medium-
intensity obstacle lights, Type A, shall be flashing-white lights, Type B shall be
flashing- red lights and Type C shall be fixed-red lights.

High-intensity obstacle light
High-intensity obstacle lights shall be flashing-white lights.

Wind Turbines
A wind turbine shall be marked and/or lighted if it is determined to be an obstacle.

Lighting

When lighting is deemed necessary, medium intensity obstacle lights shall be
used.

292

--- Page 153 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

VISUAL AIDS FOR DENOTING RESTRICTED USE AREAS

Closed Runways and Taxiways, or Parts thereof

A closed marking shall be displayed on a runway or taxiway, or portion thereof,
which is permanently closed to the use of all aircraft.

A closed marking should be displayed on a temporarily closed runway or taxiway
or portion thereof, except that such marking may be omitted when the closing is of
short duration and adequate warning by air traffic services is provided.

When a runway or taxiway or portion thereof is permanently closed, all normal
runway and taxiway markings shall be obliterated.

Lighting on a closed runway or taxiway or portion thereof shall not be operated,
except as required for maintenance purposes.

Pre-threshold Area

When the surface before a threshold is paved and exceeds 60 m in length and is
not suitable for normal use by aircraft, the entire length before the threshold shall be
marked with a chevron marking.

A chevron marking shall point in the direction of the runway and be placed as
shown in Figure 17.

Achevron marking shall be of yellow colour It shall have an overall width of 0.9 m.

Unserviceable Areas

Unserviceability markers shall be displayed wherever any portion of a taxiway,
apron or holding bay is unfit for the movement of aircraft but it is still possible for
aircraft to bypass the area safely. On a movement area used at night, unserviceability
lights shall be used.

Unserviceability markers and lights shall be placed at intervals sufficiently close
so as to delineate the unserviceable area.

Pre-threshold area of runway

unfit for the movement of Pre-threshold area of runway

aircraft and unsuitable as fit for use as a stopway by

stopway alrcraft landing In the
opposit direction but not fit
for normal movement of

aircraft

Fig 17-Unserviceable areas

293

AIR REGULATIONS

Characteristics of unserviceability markers

Unserviceability markers shall consist of conspicuous upstanding devices such as
flags, cones or marker boards.
Characteristics of unserviceability lights

An unserviceability light shall consist of a red fixed light. The light shall have
an intensity sufficient to ensure conspicuity considering the intensity of the adjacent
lights and the general level of illumination against which it would normally be viewed.
Rescue and fire fighting
General

The principal objective of a rescue and fire fighting service is to save lives in the
event of an aircraft accident or incident occurring at, or in the immediate vicinity of,
an aerodrome. Rescue and fire fighting equipment and services shall be provided at an
aerodrome.

Emergency And Other Services : Rescue And Fire Fighting

Level of protection to be provided

The level of protection provided at an aerodrome for rescue and fire fighting
shall be appropriate to the aerodrome category determined using the principles given
below, except that, where the number of movements of the aeroplanes in the highest
category normally using the aerodrome is less than 700 in the busiest consecutive
three months, the level of protection provided shall be not less than one category below
the determined category.

Note: — Either a take-off or a landing constitutes a movement.

The level of protection provided at an aerodrome for rescue and fire fighting shall
be equal to the aerodrome category determined using the principles below.

Extinguishing Agents
Both principal and complementary agents shall be provided at an aerodrome.
The principal extinguishing agent should be foam.

The complementary extinguishing agent should be a dry chemical powder suitable
for extinguishing hydrocarbon fires.

294

--- Page 154 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Aerodrome category for rescue and fire fighting

Aerodrome Aeroplane overall length Maximum
category Fuselage Width
(2)

(1) (3)
Om up to but not including 9m
9m up to but not including 12m
12m up to but not including 18m
18m up to but not including 24m
24m up to but not including 28m
28m up to but not including 39m
39m up to but not including 49m
49m up to but not including 61m
61m up to but not including 76m
76m up to but not including 90m

iy

OMAN Daf Ww HY

a
Qo

The complementary agents shall comply with the appropriate specifications of
the Bureau of India Standards (BIS) / International Organization for Standardization
dSO).

Response Time

A response time not exceeding three minutes shall be maintained by the rescue
and fire fighting services for any point of each operational runway and for any other
part of the movement area.

The operational objective of the rescue and fire fighting service shall be to achieve
a response time not exceeding two minutes to any point of each operational runway, in
optimum visibility and surface conditions.

Emergency Access Roads

Emergency access roads should be provided on an aerodrome where terrain
conditions permit their construction, so as to facilitate achieving minimum response
times. Particular attention should be given to the provision of ready access to approach
areas up to 1,000 m from the threshold, or at least within the aerodrome boundary.
Where a fence is provided, the need for convenient access to outside areas should be
taken into account.

Fire Stations

All rescue and fire fighting vehicles should normally be housed in a fire station.
Satellite fire stations should be provided whenever the response time cannot be
achieved from a single fire station.

The fire station should be located so that the access for rescue and fire fighting
vehicles into the runway area is direct and clear, requiring a minimum number of
turns.

295

AIR REGULATIONS

Communication and Alerting Systems

A discrete communication system should be provided linking a fire station with
the control tower, any other fire station on the aerodrome and the rescue and fire
fighting vehicles.

An alerting system for rescue and fire fighting personnel, capable of being
operated from that station, shall be provided at a fire station, any other fire station on
the aerodrome and the aerodrome control tower.

Radio altimeter operating area. A radio altimeter operating area shall be
established in the pre-threshold area of a precision approach category II & III runway.

Declared Distances:

a) Takeoff run available (TORA): The length of runway declared available and
suitable for the ground run of an aeroplane taking off.

b) Takeoff distance available (TODA): The length of the takeoff run available
plus the length of the clearway, if provided.

c) Accelerate-stop distance available (ASDA): The length of the takeoff run
available plus the length of the stopway, if provided.

d) Landing distance available (LDA): The length of runway which is declared
available and suitable for the ground run of an aeroplane landing.

Clearway(CWY): A defined rectangular area on the ground or water under the
control of the appropriate authority, selected or prepared as a suitable area over which
an aeroplane may make a portion of its initial climb to a specified height. A clearway
should extend laterally to a distance of at least 75 m on each side of the extended
centre line of the runway.The ground in a clearway should not project over a plane
having an upward slope of 1.25%. An object situated on a clearway which may endanger
aeroplanes in the air should be regarded as an obstacle and should be removed.

Stopway (SWY): A defined rectangular area on the ground at the end of takeoff
run available prepared as a suitable area in which an aircraft can be stopped in the
case of an abandoned takeoff.

A stopway shall have the same width as the runway with which it is associated.
A stopway should be prepared or constructed so as to be capable, in the event of an
abandoned takeoff, of supporting the aeroplane which the stopway is intended to serve,
without inducing structural damage to the aeroplane.

DISPLACED
THRESHOLD ASDA

296

--- Page 155 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

QUESTIONS

Which of the following Annexes to the Chicago convention contains minimum
specifications for the design of aerodromes?

A) Annex 14
B) Annex 11
C) Annex6

“Clearway” is a defined rectangular area established to:

A) Reduce the risk of damage to aircraft running off a runway

B) Protect aircraft during take-off or landing operations

C) Permit aircraft to make a portion of its initial climb to a specific height

The STOPWAY is a defined rectangular area on the ground at the end of take-off
run available prepared as a suitable area where:

A)  Alanding aircraft can be stopped if overcoming the end of runway

B) An aircraft can be stopped in the case of an abandoned take-off

C) Alanding aircraft can be stopped only in emergency

“ASDA” (Accelerate Stop Distance Available) is:
A) _ The length of the take-off run available plus the length of stopway and clearway

(if provided)

B) The length of the take-off run available plus the length of stopway (if stopway
provided)

C) The length of the runway plus the length of stopway available (if stopway
provided)

“instrument runways” are the following runways intended for the operation of

aircraft using instrument approach procedures:

A) Non precision approach runways, precision approach runways category |, Il
and Ill

B) Instrument approach runways, precision approach runways category |, Il and
lil
C) Precision approach runways category |, Il and Ill

“TODA” take-off distance available is:

A) The length of the take-off run available plus the length of the clearway (if
provided)

B) The length of the take-off run available plus the length of stopway and clearway
(if provided)

C) The length of the take-off run plus the length of the stopway

297

10.

11.

12.

13.

AIR REGULATIONS

The light shown by an “Aerodrome Identification Beacon” at a land aerodrome
shall be:

A) White and green colour identification given by Morse Code

B) Green colour identification given by Morse Code

C) Blue colour identification given by Morse Code

Taxiway edge lights shall be:
A) _ Fixed showing green

B) Fixed showing yellow

C) Fixed showing blue

In the case of parallel runways, each runway designation number shall be
supplemented:

A) By aletter- for example 2 parallel runways “L” and “R’- for 3 “L”,”C” and “R”
B) By aletter for 2 parallel runways

C) By anumber like “0” and “01” for 2 parallel runways

In the “PAPI” system the pilot during an approach will see the two units nearest
the runway as red and the two units farthest from the runway as white when:
A) Above the approach slope

B) Onorclose to the approach slope

C) Only on the approach slope

Runway threshold identification lights, when provided, should be:
A) Fixed green

B) _ Fixed white

C) Flashing white

What is a “barrette”?

A) Three or more ground lights closely spaced together to appear as a bar of
lights

B) A frangible structure on which approach lights are fixed

C) ACAT 2or3 holding position

What is the length of an approach lighting system of a precision-approach
runway CAT Il:

A) 600m
B) 900m
C) 300m

298

--- Page 156 ---

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Runway end lights shall be:

A) _ Fixed lights showing variable red

B) _ Fixed unidirectional lights showing red in the direction of the runway
C) Fixed lights showing variable white

Aerodromes signs should be in the following configuration:

A) — mandatory instruction signs, black backgrounds with red inscriptions

B) _ information signs, yellow or black background with black or yellow inscriptions
C) mandatory instruction signs, red background with black inscriptions

The “PAPI” shail consist of:

A) Two wing bars of 4 sharp transition multi-lamp or paired units equally spaced
B) Awing bar of 4 sharp transition multi-lamp or paired units equally spaced

C) Two wing bars of 6 sharp transition multi-lamp or paired units equally spaced

Runway threshold lights shall be:

A) _ Fixed lights green colours

B) _ Fixed lights showing green or white colours

C) Fixed unidirectional lights showing green in the direction of approach to the
runway

Taxiway centerline lights other than an exit taxiway shall be:
A) _ Fixed lights showing blue

B) _ Fixed lights showing green

C) _ Fixed lights showing yellow

How many red lights must a pilot see, whose aircraft, in final approach, is
following a normal glide path defined by a PAPI?

A) 2
B) None
Cc) 3

Runway edge lights expected iin the case of a displaced threshold shall be:
A) _ Fixed lights, white or yellow colour

B) Flashing white

C) Fixed lights showing variable white

The abbreviation PAPI stands ‘for:

A) Precision Approach Path Indicator
B) Precision Approach Power Index
C) Precision Approach Path Index

299

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

AIR REGULATIONS

High intensity obstacle lights should be:
A) _ Flashing red

B) Flashing white

C) Fixed orange

Low intensity obstacle lights on mobile objects shall be:
A) _ Fixed red or preferably orange

B) Flashing blue

C) Flashing red or preferably yellow

Low intensity obstacle lights on fixed objects shall be:
A) _ Flashing red

B) Fixed red

C) Flashing yellow

The runway edge lights shall be:

A) Red
B) White
C) Green

The aerodrome category for rescue and fire fighting is based on:

A) _ The over-all length of the longest aeroplane normally using the aerodrome and
its maximum fuselage width

B) The over-all length of the longest aeroplane

C) The longest aeroplane maximum width only

Regarding declared airfield distances the ASDA is:

A) The distance from the start of the take-off run to the last point capable of
bearing the full weight of the aircraft under normal operating conditions

B) The distance from the start of the take-off run to the end of the stopway

C) The area beyond the end of the prepared surface only available to aircraft
stopping in an emergency

“A defined rectangular area on the ground at the end of take-off run available
prepared as a suitable area in which an aircraft can be stopped in the case of
an abandoned take-off” is the definition for:

A) Runway strip

B) Runway end safety area

C)  Stopway

300

--- Page 157 ---

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

Where a parking bay is provided at an aerodrome suitable for the parking of an
aircraft which is known of believed to be the subject of unlawful interference,
what is the minimum distance that this parking bay needs to be separated form
any other parking areas, buildings.

A) 100m
B) 50m
C) 200m

Crash/Rescue (emergency) services provision is categorised according to
physical characteristics of the type of aeroplane using the aerodrome. Upon
what are the categories based?

A) — Overall length and maximum takeoff mass

B) Overall length and fuselage width

C) Maximum number of passengers on board

How is a paved pre-threshold area which is greater than 60 m in length but not
suitable for any use by aircraft, marked?

A) By white arrows directing approaching aircraft to the displaced threshold

B) ByayellowX

C) By awhite X

Which of the following systems describes an abbreviated precision approach

path indicator:

A) _ Ten light units arranged on one side of the runway in the form of a single wing
bar of four light units, with a bisecting longitudinal line of six lights

B) Twenty light units symmetrically disposed about the runway centre line in the
form of two wing bars of four light units each, with bisecting longitudinal lines of
six lights

C) Awing bar of 2 sharp transition multi-lamp units normally located on the left
side of the runway unless it is physically impracticable to do so

What colour are emergency vehicles painted that are used on the manoeuvring
area of an aerodrome?

A)  Asingle conspicuous colour, preferably red or yellowish green

B) Green

C) Orange

Alternate yellow/green centre line lights of a taxiway indicate:

A) _ The proximity of a runway
B) An /iILS/MLS critical/sensitive area
C) Astopway

301

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

AIR REGULATIONS

When taxiing on a surface with white markings, you are rolling on a:
A) Movement Area

B) Runway

C)  Clearway

What colour are apron safety line markings?
A) White

B) Red

C) Acontrasting colour from the taxiway markings

Runway centre line lights shall be fixed lights showing variable... from the
threshold to the point 900m from the runway end, alternate... and variable...
from 900m to 300m from runway end, and... from 300m to the runway end.

A) White, red and white, red

B) White, yellow, red

C) Green, yellow, red

What colour is an aerodrome beacon at a land aerodrome?
A) Yellow or yellow/white

B) Green or green/white

C) White or white/green

Which of the following describes a location sign?
A): Red writing on a white background

B) Yellow writing on a black background

C) Black writing on a yellow background

When on or close to the approach slope, the wing bar of a PAPI shows:
A) Two red lights and two white lights

B) Four red lights

C) Three white lights and one red light

Which of the following is not a mandatory instruction sign:
A) _ Taxi-holding position sign

B) Road holding position sign

C) _ Direction sign

302

--- Page 158 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

42. The number of stripes on each side of the centre line of a runway which has a
width of 45m is:

A) 3
B) 6
c) 4

43. Mandatory instructions signs on an aerodrome shall have the following
colours:
A) White inscription on a red background
B) Yellow inscription on a black background
C) Black inscription on a yellow background

44. Taxiway markings and aircraft stand markings are:

A) Red
B) Yellow
C) White

45. Taxiway centre line lights other than an exit taxiway shall be:
A) _ Fixed lights showing green.
B) Fixed lights showing yellow.
C) Fixed lights showing blue.

46. ARIWS is a system used for:
A) — warning a pilot about bird activity on take off path
B) cautioning a pilot about wind shear on finals in real time
C) warning a pilot about runway incursion in near real time

47. You see a board painted in white with letters in red on taxytrack edge. This board
isa
A) _ information sign
B) mandatory instruction sign
C) holding position sign

48. An aiming point marking shall be provided at
A) — each approach end of paved instrument runway
B) paved taxy track joining precision approach runway
C) paved runways not provided with touch down zone markings

803

AIR REGULATIONS

49, LFFZ is established around an aerodrome to;
A) _ protect aircraft from low flying aircraft
B) _ protect aircraft from laser emitters
C) _ protect aircraft from low flying fighter aircraft in military areas

50. VASIS shail be provided to serve the approach to a runway:
A) _ not served by visual approach aids
B) _ not served by non visual approach aids
C) whether or not the runway is served by visual approach aids or by non-visual
aids, where turbo jet operations take place

3804

--- Page 159 ---

VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION

ANSWERS

pi t2[3f4¢is fet 7{efe| ol ma] 2 | 13 | 14 |
jatc{[ef{e{aljaljsiciajeic{a |e |B

(15 [16 [47 [18 [19 | 20 | 21 | 22 | 23] 24 | 25 | 26 | 27 | 28
jBie{c{[e{ajc{aje|ci/sielia |e jc

EIEN ESESESESE SE Ieee ed
fate ltel;cl{[ale{siclaic}] sa jc [B|

)43 [44 [45 | 46 | 47 | 48 | 49 | 50
Ate jal{ci{s}] al ele |

305

AIR REGULATIONS

306

--- Page 160 ---

13

PROCEDURES FOR
AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES

AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

(DOC 8168, Vol 1-Flight Procedures)

INTRODUCTION:

The Procedures for Air Navigation Services — Aircraft Operations (PANS-OPS)
— Doc 8168 consists of two volumes as follows:

Volume I — Flight Procedures describes operational procedures recommended
for the guidance of flight operations personnel and flight crew. It also outlines the
various parameters on which the criteria in Volume II are based so as to illustrate the
need to adhere strictly to the published procedures in order to achieve and maintain
an acceptable level of safety in operations.

Volume Il — Construction of Visual and Instrument Flight Procedures is
intended for the guidance of procedures specialists and describes the essential areas
and obstacle clearance requirements for the achievement of safe, regular instrument
flight operations. It provides the basic guidelines to States, and those operators and
organizations producing instrument flight charts that will result in uniform practices
at all aerodromes where instrument flight procedures are carried out.

GENERAL CRITERIA FOR DEPARTURE PROCEDURES
Procedures contained in PANS-OPS assume that all engines are operating.

Note:— Development of contingency procedures is the responsibility of the
operator.

All procedures depict tracks. Pilots should attempt to maintain the track by
applying corrections to heading for known wind.

307

AIR REGULATIONS

All examples of calculations in this document are based on an altitude of 600
m (2 000 ft) above mean sea level (MSL) and a temperature of international standard
atmosphere (ISA) +15°C unless otherwise stated.

OBSTACLE CLEARANCE

Obstacle clearance is a primary safety consideration in the development of
instrument flight procedures. The criteria used and the detailed method of calculation
are covered in PANS-OPS, Volume II.

AREAS

Where track guidance is provided in the design of a procedure, each segment
comprises a specified volume of airspace, the vertical cross-section of which is an area
located symmetrically about the centre line of each segment.

The vertical cross-section of each segment is divided into primary and secondary
areas. Full obstacle clearances are applied over the primary areas reducing to zero at
the outer edges of the secondary areas (see Figure).

On straight segments, the width of the primary area at any given point is equal
to one-half of the total width.

The width of each secondary area is equal to one-quarter of the total width.

Where no track guidance is provided during a turn specified by the procedure,
the total width of the area is considered primary area.

The minimum obstacle clearance (MOC) is provided for the whole width of the
primary area. In the secondary area, MOC is provided at the inner edges reducing to
zero at the outer edges (see Figure). :

Relationship of minimum obstacle clearances in
.primary and secondary areas in cross-section

308

--- Page 161 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

INSTRUMENT DEPARTURE PROCEDURE

Design Considerations

The design of an instrument departure procedure is, in general, dictated by the
terrain surrounding the aerodrome. It may also be required to provide for air traffic
control (ATC) requirements in the case of SID routes. These factors in turn influence
the type and siting of navigation aids in relation to the departure route. Airspace
restrictions may also affect the routing and siting of navigation aids.

Aerodrome operating minima

Where obstacles cannot be cleared by the appropriate margin when the aeroplane
is flown on instruments, aerodrome operating minima are established to permit visual
flight clear of obstacles.

Wherever possible, a straight departure is specified which is aligned with the
runway centre line.

When a departure route requires a turn of more than 15° to avoid an obstacle, a
turning departure is constructed

Establishment of a departure procedure

A departure procedure is established for each runway where instrument
departures are expected to be used. It will include procedures for the various categories
of aircraft.
Wind Effect

The procedures assume that pilots will not compensate for wind effects when
being radar vectored. They also assume that pilots will compensate for known or
estimated wind effects when flying departure routes which are expressed as tracks to
be made good.

OBSTACLE CLEARANCE

The minimum obstacle clearance equals zero at the departure end of the runway
(DER). From that point, it increases by 0.8 per cent of the horizontal distance in the
direction of flight assuming a maximum turn of 15°.

In the turn initiation area and turn area, a minimum obstacle clearance of 90 m
(295 ft) is provided.

Where precipitous and mountainous terrain exist, consideration is given by the
procedures designer to increasing the minimum obstacle clearance.

309

AIR REGULATIONS

PROCEDURE DESIGN GRADIENT (PDG)

The procedure design gradient (PDG) is intended as an aid to the procedures
designer, who adjusts the route with the intention of minimizing the PDG consistent
with other constraints.

Unless otherwise published, a PDG of 3.3 per cent is assumed.

Basis of the PDG

The PDG is based on an obstacle identification surface (OIS) having a 2.5 per
cent gradient or a gradient determined by the most critical obstacle penetrating the
surface, whichever is the higher an additional margin of 0.8 per cent.

Gradient Specification

Published gradients are specified to an altitude/height after which the minimum
gradient of 3.3 per cent is considered to prevail. The final PDG continues until obstacle
clearance is ensured for the next phase of flight (i.e. en-route, holding or approach). At
this point, the departure procedure ends and is marked by a significant point.

FIXES AS AN AID IN OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE

Whenever a suitably located DME exists, additional specific height/distance
information intended for obstacle avoidance may be published. RNAV waypoint or
other suitable fixes may be used to provide a means of monitoring climb performance.

Bacause of obstects B, the gradient canmot ba reduced te 3.3% (2.5% + 0.6%) (CAT H, 5.0%) just alter pasaing obstacle A
Theo altudeelght ori at which a gradient In excess of 8.3% (CATH, 5.0%) Is no longer required is promulgatud fn

Obstacles A and B wit be promuigated. Mountain promugated on Aerodrome Obstacle Chart Typa C.

This alttudefheight end
distance wii be

Minimum obstacto clearance
(MOC) fs 0.8% of the horizontal
distance (dj from DER

310

--- Page 162 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

RADAR VECTORS

Pilots should not accept radar vectors during departure unless:

a) they are above the minimum altitude(s)/height(s) required to maintain obstacle
clearance in the event of engine failure. This relates to engine failure between
V1 and minimum sector altitude or the end of the contingency procedure as
appropriate; or

b) the departure route is non-critical with respect to obstacle clearance.

STANDARD INSTRUMENT DEPARTURES

SID Termination

The SID terminates at the first fix/facility/waypoint of the en-route phase
following the departure procedure.
STRAIGHT DEPARTURES
Alignment

A straight departure is one in which the initial departure track is within 15° of
the alignment of the runway centre line.

When obstacles exist which affect the departure route, procedure design
gradients (PDGs) greater than 3.3 per cent may be specified. When such a gradient is
specified, the altitude/height to which it extends shall be promulgated. After this point,
the PDG of 3.3 per cent (Category H, 5:0 per cent) resumes. °

Gradients to a height of 60 m (200 ft) or less, caused by close-in obstacles, are not
specified. A note will be published stating that the close-in obstacles exist.

1‘

:

103°
CAL « Extanded runway centre ine

TURNING DEPARTURES

When a departure route requires a turn of more than 15°, it is called a turning
departure. Straight flight is assumed until reaching an altitude/height of at least 120
m (894 ft), or 90 m (295 ft) for helicopters.

311

AIR REGULATIONS

Py |
3.7 ken (2.0 NMVOR
4.6 en (2.5. NM)ANDB

OMNIDIRECTIONAL DEPARTURES

GENERAL

In cases where no track guidance is provided, departure procedures are designed using
the omnidirectional method.

Where obstacles do not permit development of omnidirectional procedures, it is
necessary to: ‘

a) fly a standard instrument departure (SID) route; or

b) ensure that ceiling and visibility will permit obstacles to be avoided by
visual means.
BEGINNING OF DEPARTURE

The departure procedure begins at the departure end of the runway (DER),
which is the end of the area declared suitable for take-off (i.e. the end of the runway or
clearway as appropriate).

Since the point of lift-off will vary, the departure procedure assumes that a turn
at 120 m (394 ft) above the elevation of the aerodrome is not initiated sooner than 600
m from the beginning of the runway.

Procedures are normally designed/optimized for turns at a point 600 m from the

312

--- Page 163 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

beginning of the runway.

However, in some cases turns may not be initiated before the DER (or a specified
point), and this information will be noted on the departure chart.

For Category H procedures, procedure turns can be initiated 90 m (295 ft) above
the elevation if the DER and the earliest initiation point are at the beginning of the
runway/FATO.

PROCEDURE DESIGN GRADIENT (PDG)

Unless otherwise specified, departure procedures assume a 3.3 per cent
(helicopters, 5 per cent) PDG and a straight climb on the extended runway centre line
until reaching 120 m (394 ft) (helicopters, 90 m (295 ft)) above the aerodrome elevation.

The basic procedure ensures:

a) the aircraft climbs on the extended runway centre line to 120 m (894 ft)
before turns can be specified; and

b) at least 90 m (295 ft) of obstacle clearance is provided before turns greater
than 15° are specified.

The omnidirectional departure procedure is designed using any one of a
combination of the following:

a) Standard Case: Where no obstacles penetrate the 2.5 per cent obstacle
identification surface (OIS), and 90 m (295 ft) of obstacle clearance prevails, a 3.3
per cent climb to 120 m (394 ft) will satisfy the obstacle clearance requirements
for a turn in any direction.

4» distance where the sircraft climbing at the minimum
gradient (3.3% or the gradient specified in the procedure,
whichever is the higher} will have reached te
fin akitudefheight. H the turn height is 120 m (294 8)
above the DER, tiie distance is 3.4 ten (1.9 NB}
for a 3.3% gradiont,

Areas 1 and 2 and turn initiation area for omnidirectional departures

3138

AIR REGULATIONS

b) Specified turn altitude/height: Where obstacle(s) preclude omnidirectional
turns at 120 m (894 ft), the procedure will specify a 3.3 per cent climb to an
altitude/height where omnidirectional turns can be made.

c) Specified procedure design gradient: Where obstacle(s) exist, the procedure
may define a minimum gradient of more than 3.3 per cent to a specified altitude/
height before turns are permitted.

d) Sector departures: Where obstacle(s) exist, the procedure may identify sector(s)
for which either a minimum gradient or a minimum turn altitude/height is
specified (e.g. “climb straight ahead to altitude/height ... before commencing a
turn to the east/the sector 0°-180° and to altitude/height ... before commencing a
turn to the west/the sector 180°-360”).

Area 8 for omnidirectional departures

314

--- Page 164 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

GENERAL INFORMATION FOR RNAV SYSTEMS

In RNAV guidance systems, a computer converts navigation data inputs into
aircraft position, calculates track and distance and provides steering guidance to the
next waypoint. The limitations of RNAV systems are those of the computers on which
they are based.

The computer is programmed so that calculation errors are minimal and do not
affect the accuracy of the output significantly. The computer, however, cannot identify
data input errors.

BASIC GNSS RECEIVERS

Straight Departures

Where the alignment of the initial departure track (a15°) is determined by the
position of the first waypoint located after the DER, there are no unique requirements
for the basic GNSS receiver.

Turning Departures

Turns are specified as a “turn at a fly-by waypoint”, “turn at a flyover waypoint”
or “turn at an altitude/height”. For some systems, turns at an altitude/height cannot
be coded in the database, and in this case, such turns must be executed manually.

Sattelite -Based Augmentation System (SBAS)

An SBAS augments core satellite constellations by providing ranging, integrity
and correction information via geostationary satellites. The system comprises a network
of ground reference stations that observe satellite signals, and master stations that
process observed data and generate SBAS messages for uplink to the geostationary
satellites, which broadcast the SBAS message to the users.

Straight Departure

From the DER to the turn initiation point of the first waypoint in the departure
procedure, the SBAS receiver provides a nominal full-scale deflection (FSD) of 0.3 NM.
Larger FSDs may be acceptable with augmentations, such as an autopilot, that can
control the flight technical error.

Turning Departure

The criteria are dependent on whether the first waypoint is a fly-by or flyover
waypoint. For a fly-by waypoint, turn anticipation is always provided. At turn
initiation, FSD and integrity performance transitions are as described in, “Straight
departure”. For a flyover waypoint, there is no turn anticipation. FSD and integrity
performance transitions occur when the waypoint is sequenced. The SBAS receiver
will not transition to en-route integrity performance until the final waypoint in the
departure procedure is sequenced.

Ground -Based Augmentation System (GBAS)

No departure criteria specifically designed for GBAS exists. Departure operations
based upon basic GNSS or SBAS may be flown by aircraft with a GBAS receiver using

315

AIR REGULATIONS

the optional GBAS positioning service.

RNP-Based Departure Procedures

Departures may be based on RNAV VOR/DME, RNAV DME/DME, basic GNSS
or RNP criteria. Most FMS-equipped aircraft are capable of following RNAV procedures
based on more than one of the above systems.

There are four kinds of turns:
a) turn at a fly-by waypoint;
b) ‘turn at a flyover waypoint;
¢) turn at an altitude/height; and
d) fixed radius turn (generally associated with procedures based on RNP).
GENERAL CRITERIA FOR ARRIVAL AND APPROACH
PROCEDURES
ACCURACY OF FIXES

Fix Formed By Intersection

Because all navigation facilities and waypoints have accuracy limitations, the
geographic point which is identified is not precise but may be anywhere within an area
called the fix tolerance area which surrounds its plotted point of intersection. Figure
illustrates the intersection of two radials or tracks from different navigation facilities.

Fix Tolerance Area

Fix tolerance area

316

--- Page 165 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

FIX TOLERANCE FOR OTHER TYPES OF
NAVIGATION SYSTEMS

Surveillance Radar

Radar fix tolerances are based on radar mapping accuracies, azimuth resolution,
flight technical tolerance, controller technical tolerances, and the speed of aircraft in
the terminal area. The fix tolerances are listed below:

a) terminal area surveillance radar (TAR) within 37 km (20 NM): fix tolerance
is +1.5 km (0.8 NM); and
b) en-route surveillance radar (RSR) within 74 km (40 NM): fix tolerance is
+8.1 km (1.7 NM).

Distance measuring equipment (DME)
Fix tolerance is +0.46 km (0.25 NM) + 1.25 per cent of distance to the antenna.

75 MHz marker beacon
Determine the fix tolerance for instrument landing system (ILS) and “z” markers
for use with instrument approach procedures.

TYPES OF APPROACH
Straight-in Approach

Wherever possible, a straight-in approach will be specified which is aligned with the
runway centre line. In the case of non-precision approaches, a straight-in approach is
considered acceptable if the angle between the final approach track and the runway
centre line is 30° or less.

Circling Approach

A circling approach will be specified in those cases where terrain or other constraints
cause the final approach track alignment or descent gradient to fall outside the criteria
for a straight-in approach. The final approach track of a circling approach procedure
is in most cases aligned to pass over some portion of the usable landing surface of the
aerodrome.

CATEGORIES OF AEROPLANES

Category A: less than 169 km/h (91 kt) indicated airspeed (IAS

Category B: 169 km/h (91 kt) or more but less than 224 km/h
(121 kt) IAS

Category C: 224 km/h (121 kt) or more but less than 261 km/h
(141 kt) IAS

Category D: 261 km/h (141 kt) or more but less than 307 km/h
(166 kt) IAS

Category E: 307 km/h (166 kt) or more but less than 391 km/h

(211 kt) IAS

317

AIR REGULATIONS

The five categories of typical aeroplanes have been established based the indicated
airspeed at threshold (Vat) which is equal to the stall speed Vso multiplied by 1.3 or
stall speed Vslg multiplied by 1.23 (whichever is higher) in the landing configuration
at maximum certificated landing mass.

Speeds for procedure calculations in knots (kt)

Range of Range of Maximum Maximum speeds
speed for finalapproach speeds for for missed
initial speeds visual approach
approach manoeuvring
(circling) Intermediate Final

<91 90/150(110*) 70/100 100 110
91/120 —120/180(140*) 85/130 180 150

141/165 185/250 130/185 185 265
166/210 185/250 155/230 230 275
H N/A 70/120** 60/90*** 90 90

CATH N/A 70/120 60/90 70 or 90 70 or 90
(PinS)***

A
B
Cc 121/140 160/240 115/160 160 240
D
E

V ., — Speed at threshold based on 1.3 times stall speed V,, or 1.23 times stall speed V,, in the landing
configuration at maximum certificated landing mass. (Not applicable to helicopters.)
* Maximum speed for reversal and racetrack procedures.

** Maximum speed for reversal and racetrack procedures up to and including 6000 ft is 100 kt, and
maximum speed for reversal and racetrack procedures above 6000 ft is 110 kt.

*** Helicopter point-in-space procedures based on basic GNSS may be designed using maximum speeds of
120 KIAS for initial and intermediate segments and 90 KIAS on final and missed approach segments,
or 90 KIAS for initial and intermediate segments and 70 KIAS on final and missed approach segments
based on operational need. Refer to PANS-OPS, Volume II, Part IV, Chapter 1, “Area navigation
(RNAV) point-in-space (PinS) approach procedures for helicopters using basic GNSS receivers.”

Note:— The V at speeds given in Column 1 of Table 1-4-1-1 are converted exactly from those in this table,
since they determine the category of aircraft. The speeds given in the remaining columns are converted and
rounded to the nearest multiple of five for operational reasons and from the standpoint of operational safety
are considered to be equivalent.

Segments of the Approach Procedure

The approach segments begin and end at designated fixes. However, under some
circumstances certain of the segments may begin at specified points where no fixes
are available. For example, the final approach segment of a precision approach may
start where the intermediate flight altitude intersects the nominal glide path (the final
approach point).

318

--- Page 166 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

DESCENT GRADIENT

In instrument approach procedure design, adequate space is allowed for descent
from the facility crossing altitude/height to the runway threshold for straight-in
approach or to OCA/H for circling approaches.

Adequate space for descent is provided by establishing a maximum allowable
descent gradient for each segment of the procedure. The minimum/optimum descent
gradient/angle in the final approach of a procedure with

FAF is 5.2 per cent/3.0° (52 m/km (318 ft/NM)). Where a steeper descent gradient
is necessary, the maximum permissible is 6.5 per cent/3.7° (65 m/km (895 ft/NM)) for
Category A and B aircraft, 6.1 per cent/3.5° (61 m/km (370 ft/NM)) for Category C, D
and E aircraft, and 10 per cent (5.7°) for Category H.

CONTINUOUS DESCENT FINAL APPROACH (CDFA)

This technique requires a continuous descent, flown either with VNAV guidance
calculated by on-board equipment or based on manual calculation of the required rate
of descent, without level-offs. The rate of descent is selected and adjusted to achieve
a continuous descent to a point approximately 15 m (50 ft) above the landing runway
threshold or the point where the flare manoeuvre should begin for the type of aircraft
flown. The descent shall be calculated and flown to pass at or above the minimum
altitude at any stepdown fix. CDFA with advisory VNAV guidance calculated by on-

board equipment.

Segments of instrument approach

319

AIR REGULATIONS

ARRIVAL SEGMENT

A standard instrument arrival (STAR) route permits transition from the en-
route phase to the approach phase.

When necessary or where an operational advantage is obtained, arrival routes
from the en-route phase to a fix or facility used in the procedure are published.

PROTECTION OF THE ARRIVAL SEGMENT

The width of the protection area decreases from the “en-route” value until the
“initial approach” value with a maximum convergence angle of 30° each side of the
axis.

This convergence begins at 46 km (25 NM) before the initial approach fix (IAF)
if the length of the arrival route is greater than or equal to 46 km (25 NM). It begins at
the starting point of the arrival route if the length of the arrival route is less than 46
km (25 NM).

The arrival route normally ends at the IAF. Omnidirectional or sector arrivals
can be provided taking into account minimum sector altitudes (MSA).

MINIMUM SECTOR ALTITUDES (MSA)/TERMINAL ARRIVAL ALTITUDES
(TAA)

Minimum sector altitudes or terminal arrival altitudes are established for each
aerodrome and provide at least 300 m (1 000 ft) obstacle clearance within 46 km (25
NM) of the navigation aid, initial approach fix or intermediate fix associated with the
approach procedure for that aerodrome.

TERMINAL AREA RADAR (TAR)

When terminal area radar is employed, the aircraft is vectored to a fix, or onto the
intermediate or final approach track, at a point where the approach may be continued
by the pilot by referring to the instrument approach chart.

INITIAL APPROACH SEGMENT

The initial approach segment begins at the initial approach fix (LAF) and ends
at the intermediate fix (IF). In the initial approach, the aircraft has left the en-route
structure and is manoeuvring to enter the intermediate approach segment.

Aircraft speed and configuration will depend on the distance from the aerodrome,
and the descent required.

Maximum angle of interception of initial approach segment

Normally track guidance is provided along the initial approach segment to the
IF, with a maximum angle of interception of:

a) 90° for a precision approach; and
b) 120° for a non-precision approach.

320

--- Page 167 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

Minimum Obstacle Clearance

The initial approach segment provides at least 300 m (1 000 ft) of obstacle
clearance in the primary area, reducing laterally to zero at the outer edge of the
secondary area.

TYPES OF MANOEUVRES

Where no suitable IAF or IF is available to construct the instrument procedure,
a reversal procedure, racetrack or holding pattern is required.

Reversal Procedure

The reversal procedure may be in the form of a procedure or base turn. Entry is
restricted to a specific direction or sector. In these cases, a specific pattern — normally
a base turn or procedure turn — is prescribed.

The directions and timing specified should be strictly followed in order to remain
within the airspace provided. It should be noted that the airspace provided for these
procedures does not permit a racetrack or holding manoeuvre to be conducted unless
so specified.

There are three generally recognized manoeuvres related to the reversal
procedure, each with its own airspace characteristics:

a) 45°/225° procedure turn (see Figure).
b) 80°/260° procedure turn (see Figure).

The duration of the initial outbound leg of a procedure may be varied in
accordance with aircraft speed categories in order to reduce the overall
length of the protected area. In this case, separate procedures are
published.

c) Base turn, (see Figure).

The outbound track and/or the timing may be different for the various categories
of aircraft. Where this is done, separate procedures are published.
Racetrack Procedure
A racetrack procedure consists of:
a) aturn from the inbound track through 180° from overhead the facility or fix
on to the outbound track, for 1, 2 or 8 minutes; followed by
b) a 180° turn in the same direction to return to the inbound track (see
Figure).

As an alternative to timing, the outbound leg may be limited by a DME distance
or intersecting radial/bearing.

321

A. 45°7180° procedure tum

AIR REGULATIONS

End of outbound leg Cited by a radial or DME
Mistanos froca a multably

Types of reversal and racetrack procedures

822

tack guidnece
ne track guidance


--- Page 168 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

INTERMEDIATE APPROACH SEGMENT
This is the segment during which the aircraft speed and configuration should

be adjusted to prepare the aircraft for final approach. For this reason, the descent
gradient is kept as shallow as possible.

Minimum Obstacle Clearance

During the intermediate approach, the obstacle clearance requirement reduces
from 300 m (984 ft) to 150 m (492 ft) in the primary area, reducing laterally to zero at
the outer edge of the secondary area.

Beginning and end of the Segment

Where a final approach fix (FAF) is available, the intermediate approach segment
begins when the aircraft is on the inbound track of the procedure turn, base turn or
final inbound leg of the racetrack procedure. It ends at the FAF or final approach point
(FAP), as applicable.

Note:— Where no FAF is specified, the inbound track is the final approach segment.

FINAL APPROACH SEGMENT

This is the segment in which alignment and descent for landing are made. Final
approach may be made to a runway for a straight-in landing, or to an aerodrome for a
visual manoeuvre.

Types of final approach
The criteria for final approach vary according to the type. These types are:

a) Non-precision approach (NPA) with final approach fix (FAF);
b) NPA without FAF;

c) Approach with vertical guidance (APV); and

d) Precision approach (PA).

NPA WITH FAF

FAF Location

This segment begins at a facility or fix, called the final approach fix (FAF) and
ends at the missed approach point (MAPt) (see Figure). The FAF is sited on the final
approach track at a distance that permits selection of final approach configuration,
and descent from intermediate approach altitude/height to the appropriate MDA/H
either for a straight-in approach or for a visual circling. The optimum distance for
locating the FAF relative to the threshold is 9.3 km (5.0 NM). The maximum length
should not normally be greater than 19 km (10 NM).

Stepdown Fixes
A stepdown fix may be incorporated in some non-precision approach procedures.
In this case, two OCA/H values are published:

a) a higher value applicable to the primary procedure; and

323

AIR REGULATIONS

b) a lower value applicable only if the stepdown fix is positively identified
during the approach.

NPA WITHOUT FAF

Sometimes an aerodrome is served by a single facility located on or near the
aerodrome, and no other facility is suitably situated to form a FAF. In this case, a
procedure may be designed where the facility is both the IAF and the MAPt.

These procedures indicate:
a) aminimum altitude/height for a reversal procedure or racetrack; and
b) an OCA/H for final approach.

In the absence of a FAF, descent to MDA/H is made once the aircraft is established
inbound on the final approach track. Procedure altitudes/heights will not be developed
for non-precision approach procedures without a FAF.

In procedures of this type, the final approach track cannot normally be aligned
on the runway centre line.

Whether OCA/H for straight-in approach limits are published or not depends on
the angular difference between the track and the runway and position of the track with
respect to the runway threshold.

altitude / height (MDA/H) for non-precision approaches
(example with a controlling obstacle in the final approach)

824

--- Page 169 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

Margin or Lower limit. Based on operational consideration of: category
of. operation, ground/airborne equipment characteristics, aircraft performance,
meteorological conditions, aerodrome characteristics, terrain profile/radio altimeter,
pressure error/pressure altimeter, etc. and crew qualifications.

PRECISION APPROACH

Final approach point (FAP)

The final approach segment begins at the final approach point (FAP). This is a
point in space on the final approach track where the intermediate approach altitude/
height intercepts the nominal glide path/microwave landing system (MLS) elevation
angle.

Final Approach Length

The intermediate approach altitude/height generally intercepts the glide path/
MLS elevation angle at heights from 300 m (1 000 ft) to 900 m (3 000 ft) above runway
elevation. In this case, for a 3° glide path, interception occurs between 6 km (3 NM)
and 19 km (10 NM) from the threshold.

The intermediate approach track or radar vector is designed to place the aircraft
on the localizer or the MLS azimuth specified for the final approach track at an altitude/
height that is below the nominal glide path/MLS elevation angle.

Outer Marker/DME fix

The final approach area contains a fix or facility that permits verification of the
glide path/MLS elevation angle/altimeter relationship. The outer marker or equivalent
DME fix is normally used for this purpose. Prior to crossing the fix, descent may be
made on the glide path/MLS elevation angle to the altitude/height of the published fix
crossing.

Descent below the fix crossing altitude/height should not be made prior to
crossing the fix.

It is assumed that the aircraft altimeter reading on crossing the fix is correlated
with the published altitude, allowing for altitude error and altimeter tolerances.

Note: FAF is associated with Non Precision Approach and FAP with Precision
Approach,
FINAL APPROACH FIX (FAF)

A specified point on a non-precision instrument approach which identifies the
commencement of the final segment.
FINAL APPROACH POINT (FAP)

A specified point on the glide path of a precision instrument approach which
identifies the commencement of the final segment.

825

AIR REGULATIONS

DETERMINATION OF DECISION ALTITUDE (DA) OR
DECISION HEIGHT (DH)
Margin. The margin is dependent on aircraft approach speed, height loss and
altimetry and is adjustable for the steep glide paths and high level aerodromes.

DAOR DH sd

MARGIN OR _
LOWER LIMIT === :

HEIGHT OF HIGHEST OBSTACLE
IN APP. OR EQU. MIA OBST,

THRESHOLD ELEVATION —#e.14..)

MEAN SEA LEVEL

Relationship of obstacle clearance altitude/height (OCA/H) to decision altitude/height
(DA/H) for precision approaches

326

--- Page 170 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

MISSED APPROACH SEGMENT

The design of the missed approach has been kept as simple as possible and
consists of three phases (initial, intermediate and final).

Only one missed approach procedure is established for each instrument approach
procedure. It is designed to provide protection from obstacles throughout the missed
approach manoeuvre. It specifies a point where the missed approach begins, and a
point or an altitude/height where it ends.

The missed approach should be initiated not lower than the decision altitude/
height (DA/H) in precision approach procedures, or at a specified point in non-precision
approach procedures not lower than the minimum descent altitude/height (MDA/H).

The MAPt in a procedure may be defined by:

a) the point of intersection of an electronic glide path with the applicable DA/H in
APV or precision approaches;

or

b) a navigation facility, a fix, or a specified distance from the final approach fix
(FAF) in non-precision approaches. If upon reaching the MAPt the required visual
reference is not established, the procedure requires that a missed approach be
initiated at once in order to maintain protection from obstacles.

Missed Approach Gradient
Normally procedures are based on a minimum missed approach climb gradient
of 2.5 per cent.

ae

appeoach

Missed approach phases

3827

AIR REGULATIONS

INITIAL PHASE

The initial phase begins at the MAPt and ends at the start of climb (SOC). This phase
requires the concentrated attention of the pilot on establishing the climb and the changes in
aeroplane configuration. It is assumed that guidance equipment is not extensively utilized
during these manoeuvres, and for this reason, no turns are specified in this phase.

INTERMEDIATE PHASE

The intermediate phase begins at the SOC. The climb is continued, normally
straight ahead. It extends to the first point where 50 m (164 ft) obstacle clearance is
obtained and can be maintained.

The intermediate missed approach track may be changed by a maximum of 15°
from that of the initial missed approach phase. During this phase, it is assumed that
the aircraft begins track corrections.

FINAL PHASE

The final phase begins at the point where 50 m (164 ft) obstacle clearance is first
obtained (for Category H procedures, 40 m (181 ft)) and can be maintained. It extends
to the point where a new approach, holding or a return to en-route flight is initiated.
Turns may be prescribed in this phase.

Turning Missed Approach

Turns in a missed approach procedure are only prescribed where terrain or other
factors make a turn necessary.
Airspeed

The protected airspace for turns is based on the speeds for final missed approach.

Approach and landing operations using instrument approach procedures.
Instrument approach and landing operations are classified as follows:

ICAO CLASSIFICATION
NON PRECISION APPROACH WITH VERTICAL PRECISION
APPROACH (NPA GUIDANCE (APV APPROACH (PA
[PBN]

CONVENTIONAL

LEGEND: GLS - GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite System) Landing System
PBN — Performance Based Navigation SBAS/ABAS — Sattelite/Aircraft Based Augmentation Systems
LIV NAV — Lateral/Vertical Nav LPV — Localiser Performance with Vertical Gidance

328

--- Page 171 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

Instrument approach procedure (IAP).

A series of predetermined manoeuvres by reference to flight instruments with
specified protection from obstacles from the initial approach fix, or where applicable,
from the beginning of a defined arrival route to a point from which a landing can be
completed and thereafter, if a landing is not completed, to a position at which holding
or en-route obstacle clearance criteria apply.

Instrument approach operations.

; An approach and landing using instruments for navigation guidance based on
an instrument approach procedure. There are two methods for executing instrument
approach operations: ie

a) a two-dimensional (2D) instrument approach operation, using lateral
navigation guidance only; and
b) athree-dimensional (8D) instrument approach operation, using both lateral
and vertical navigation guidance.
5 Lateral and vertical navigation guidance refers to the guidance provided either
y:

a) a ground-based radio navigation aid; or
b) computer-generated navigation data from ground-based, space-based, self-
contained navigation aids or a combination of these.
Instrument approach operations shall be classified, based on the designed
lowest operating minima below which an approach operation shall only be continued
with the required visual reference as follows:

a) Type A:a minimum descent height or decision height at or above 75 m (250
ft); and
b) Type B: a decision height below 75 m (250 ft). Type B instrument approach
operations are categorized as:
1) Category I (CAT I): a decision height not lower than 60 m (200 ft) and
with either a visibility not less than 800 m or a runway visual range not
less than 550 m;
2) Category II (CAT II): a decision height lower than 60 m (200 ft), but
not lower than 30 m (100 ft) and a runway visual range not less than
800 m;
3) Category IIA (CAT IIIA): a decision height lower than 30 m (100 ft)
or no decision height and a runway visual range not less than 175 m;
4) Category IIIB (CAT IIIB): a decision height lower than 15 m (50 ft),
or no decision height and a runway visual range less than 175 m but
not less than 50 m; and
5) Category ITIC (CAT IIIC): no decision height and no runway visual
range limitations.

329

AIR REGULATIONS

Category II and Category III instrument approach operations shall not be
authorized unless RVR information is provided.

The required visual reference means that section of the visual aids or of the
approach area which should have been in view for sufficient time for the pilot to have
made an assessment of the aircraft position and rate of change of position, in relation
to the desired flight path. In the case of a circling approach operation the required
visual reference is the runway environment.

Terminal Instrument Flight Procedures are classified as one of the following
types:

Non-precision approach (NPA) procedure.. An instrument approach
procedure designed for 2D instrument approach operations Type A.

Non-precision approach procedures may be flown using a continuous descent
final approach technique (CDFA). CDFA with advisory VNAV guidance calculated by
on-board equipment are considered 3D instrument approach operations. CDFA with
manual calculation of the required rate of descent are considered 2D instrument
approach operations.

(a) Conventional: Non-precision Approach (Ground-based); Non-
precision approach runway. A runway served by visual aids and non-visual
aid(s) intended for landing operations following an instrument approach
operation type A and a visibility not less than 1 000 m.

(b) PBN: Non-precision Approach (RNP APCH); RNP APCH is the PBN
navigation specification dealing with approach procedure using GNSS.
Those approaches are generally charted under the name RNAV(GNSS) or
RNAV(GPS). Three approaches under this category are RNP App, NPA GPS
and Lateral Nav App.(LNAV).

Approach procedure with vertical guidance (APV). A performance-
based navigation (PBN) instrument approach procedure designed for 3D instrument
approach operations Type A.

(a) PBN: Required Navigation Performance Authorization Required
Approach (RNP AR APCH); APV offers 3D guidance, but with lower
performance than specified for Precision App. APV covers four possible types
of approach procedures: APV BaroVNAV approach, APV SBAS approach,
LNAV/VNAV App and LPV App.

Precision approach (PA) procedure.

An instrument approach procedure based on navigation systems (ILS, MLS,
GLS and SBAS Cat I) designed for 83D instrument approach operations Type A or B.

(a) Conventional: Precision Approach (Ground-based); conventional 3D
approaches using ILS, MLS or PAR.

(b) PBN: Precision Approach (GBAS); GBAS Landing System (GLS). A
system for a 3D approach and landing operations using GNSS, augmented by

330

--- Page 172 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

a ground-based Augmentation system (GBAS), as the primary navigational
reference. GBAS provides ILS Cat I equivalent service.

Obstacle clearance altitude (OCA) or obstacle clearance height (OCH).

The lowest altitude or the lowest height above the elevation of the relevant
runway threshold or the aerodrome elevation as applicable, used in establishing
compliance with appropriate obstacle clearance criteria.

Note 1:— Obstacle clearance altitude is referenced to mean sea level and obstacle
clearance height is referenced to the threshold elevation or in the case of non-
precision approaches to the aerodrome elevation or the threshold elevation if that is
more than 2m (7 ft) below the aerodrome elevation. An obstacle clearance height
for a circling approach is referenced to the aerodrome elevation.

Note 2:— For convenience when both expressions are used they may be written in
the form ‘obstacle clearance altitude/height” and abbreviated “OCA/H”.

Minimum descent altitude (MDA) or Minimum descent height (MDH).
A specified altitude or height in a non precision approach or circling approach below
which descent must not be made without the required visual reference.

Note 1:— Minimum descent altitude (MDA) is referenced to mean sea level and
minimum descent height (MDH) is referenced to the aerodrome elevation or to the
threshold elevation if that is more than 2 m (7 ft) below the aerodrome elevation.
A minimum descent height for a circling approach is referenced to the aerodrome
elevation.

Note 2:— The required visual reference means that section of the visual aids or of the
approach area which should have been in view for sufficient time for the pilot to have
made an assessment of the aircraft position and rate of change of position, in
relation to the desired flight path. In the case of a circling approach the required
visual reference is the runway environment.

Note 3:— For convenience when both expressions are used they may be written in
the form “minimum descent altitude/height” and abbreviated “MDA/H”

Decision altitude/height (DA/H). A specified altitude or height in the precision
approach or approach with vertical guidance at which a missed approach must be initiated
if the required visual reference to continue the approach has not been established.

Note 1:— Decision altitude (DA) is referenced to mean sea level (MSL) and decision
height (DH) is referenced to the threshold elevation.

Note 2:—The required visual reference means that section of the visual aids or of
the approach area which should have been in view for sufficient time for the pilot to
have made an assessment of the aircraft position and rate of change of position,
in relation to the desired flight path. In Category III operations with a decision
height the required visual reference is that specified for the particular procedure
and operation.

331

AIR REGULATIONS

Note 3:— For convenience where both expressions are used they may be written in the
form decision altitude/height” and abbreviated “DA/H”.

VISUAL MANOEUVRING (CIRCLING) IN THE VICINITY OF THE
AERODROME:

Visual manoeuvring (circling) is the term used to describe the phase of flight
after an instrument approach has been completed. It brings the aircraft into position
for landing on a runway which is not suitably located for straight-in approach, i.e. one
where the criteria for alignment or descent gradient cannot be met.

THE VISUAL MANOEUVRING (CIRCLING) AREA

The visual manoeuvring area for a circling approach is determined by drawing
arcs centred on each runway threshold and joining those arcs with tangent lines (see
Figure). The radius of the arcs is related to:

a) aircraft category;

b) speed: speed for each category;

c) wind speed: 46 km/h (25 kt) throughout the turn; and

d) bank angle: 20° average or 3° per second, whichever requires less bank.

Radius of tha orcs (R} varies with
the aircraft category

Visual manoeuvring (circling approach) area

Obstacle Clearance

When the visual manoeuvring (circling) area has been established, the obstacle
clearance altitude/height (OCA/H) is determined for each category of aircraft.

Minimum descent altitude/height (MDA/H)

When the OCA/H is established, an MDA/H is also specified to allow for
operational considerations. Descent below MDA/H should not be made until:

a) visual reference has been established and can be maintained;

b) the pilot has the landing threshold in sight; and

332

--- Page 173 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

c) the required obstacle clearance can be maintained and the aircraft is ina
position to carry out a landing.
Visual manoeuvring (circling) area not considered for obstacle clearance
Visual manoeuvring (circling) area exclusions

A sector in the circling area where a prominent obstacle exists may be ignored
for OCA/H calculations if it is outside the final approach and missed approach areas.

MISSED APPROACH PROCEDURE WHILE CIRCLING

If visual reference is lost while circling to land from an instrument approach,
the missed approach specified for that particular procedure must be followed. The
pilot will make an initial climbing turn toward the landing runway and overhead the
aerodrome. At this point, the pilot will establish the aircraft climbing on the missed
approach track.

The circling manoeuvre may be carried out in more than one direction. For
this reason, different patterns are required to establish the aircraft on the prescribed
missed approach course depending on its position at the time visual reference is lost.

VISUAL MANOEUVRING (CIRCLING)

YMA MDA OR MDH, —

MARGIN OR |
LOWER LIMIT a | a

OCA OR OCH -

MINIMUM OBSTACLE CLEARANCE —

HEIGHT OF HIGHEST OBSTACLE
IN CIRCLING AREA

AERODROME ELEVATION

MEAN SEA LEVEL one est ott

Relationship of obstacle clearance altitude/height (OCA/H) to minimum descent altitude/height
(MDA/H) for visual manoeuvring (circling)

333

AIR REGULATIONS

HOLDING PROCEDURES
IN-FLIGHT PROCEDURES ENTRY, HOLDING

Speeds
Holding patterns shall be entered and flown at or below the airspeeds given in Tables.

Bank angle/rate of turn
All turns are to be made at a bank angle of 25° or at a rate of 3° per second, whichever
requires the lesser bank.

Allowance for known wind

All procedures depict tracks. Pilots should attempt to maintain the track by making
allowance for known wind by applying corrections both to heading and timing. This
should be done during entry and while flying in the holding pattern.

Start of outbound timing

Outbound timing begins over or abeam the fix, whichever occurs later. If the abeam
position cannot be determined, start timing when the turn to outbound is completed.
Outbound leg length based on a DME distance

Ifthe outbound leg length is based on a DME distance, then the outbound leg terminates
as soon as the limiting DME distance is reached.

Limiting radials

In the case of holding away from the station, where the distance from the holding fix
to the VOR/DME station is short, a limiting radial may be specified. A limiting radial
may also be specified where airspace conservation is essential.

If the limiting radial is reached before the limiting DME distance, this radial should
be followed until a turn inbound is initiated. The turn should be initiated at the latest
where the limiting DME distance is reached.

ATC notification

If for any reason a pilot is unable to conform to the procedures for normal conditions,
air traffic control should be advised as early as possible.

ENTRY

The entry into the holding pattern shall be according to heading in relation to the three
entry sectors shown in Figure, recognizing a zone of flexibility of 5° on either side of
the sector boundaries.

For holding on a VOR intersection, the entry track is limited to the radials
forming the intersection.

334

--- Page 174 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

For holding on a VOR/DME fix, the entry track is limited to:
a) the VOR radial;

b) the DME arc; or
Note:— A DME arc entry procedure is specified only when there is a specific operational
difficulty which makes the use of other entry procedures impossible.

c) the entry radial to a VOR/DME fix at the end of the outbound leg, as published.

Sector 1 entry

Sector 1 procedure (parallel entry):

a) at the fix, the aircraft is turned left onto an outbound heading for the appropriate
period of time; then

b) the aircraft is turned left onto the holding side to intercept the inbound track or to
return to the fix; and then

ce) on second arrival over the holding fix, the aircraft is turned right to follow the
holding pattern.

Sector 2 entry
Sector 2 procedure (offset entry):

a) at the fix, the aircraft is turned onto a heading to make good a track making an
angle of 30° from the reciprocal of the inbound track on the holding side; then

b) the aircraft will fly outbound:

1) for the appropriate period of time, where timing is specified; or

2) until the appropriate limiting DME distance is reached, where distance is
specified. If a limiting radial is also specified, then the outbound distance
is determined either by the limiting DME distance or the limiting radial,

whichever comes first;
c) the aircraft is turned right to intercept the inbound holding track; and
d) on second arrival over the holding fix, the aircraft is turned right to follow the
holding pattern.

Sector 3 entry
Sector 3 procedure (direct entry): Having reached the fix, the aircraft is turned right to

follow the holding pattern.

835

AIR REGULATIONS

. Entry sectors
Holding speeds — Categories A through E

Normal Conditions

Up to 4 250 m (14 000 ft)

Above 4 250 m (14 000 ft) to
6 100 m (20 000 ft) inclusive

Turbulence conditions

425 km/h (230 kt)2 520 km/h (280 kt)3
315 km/h (170 kt)4 315 km/h (170 kt)4

445 m/h (240 kt)5 520 km/h (280 kt)
or

0.8 Mach,
whichever is less3

Above 6 100 m (20 000 ft) to
10 350 m (34 000 ft) inclusive

Above 10 350 m (34 000 ft) 0.83 Mach 0.83 Mach

The levels shown represent altitudes or corresponding flight levels depending upon the altimeter

setting in use.

2. When the holding procedure is followed by the initial segment of an instrument approach
procedure promulgated at a speed higher than 425 km/h (280 kt), the holding should also be
promulgated at this higher speed wherever possible.

3. The speed of 520 km/h (280 kt) (0.8 Mach) reserved for turbulence conditions shall be used for
holding only after prior clearance with ATC, unless the relevant publications indicate that the
holding area can accommodate aircraft flight at these high holding speeds.

4. For holdings limited to CAT A and B aircraft only.

5. Wherever possible, 520 km/h (280 kt) should be used for holding procedures associated with

airway route structures.

490 km/h (265 kt)5

336

--- Page 175 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

DME ARC ENTRY

DME Arc Entry: At the fix, the aircraft shall enter the holding pattern in accordance
with either the Sector 1 or Sector 3 entry procedure.
Time/distance outbound
The still air time for flying the outbound entry heading should not exceed:
a) one minute if at or below 4 250 m (14 000 ft); or
b) one and one-half minutes if above 4 250 m (14 000 ft).

Where DME is available, the length of the outbound leg may be specified in
terms of distance instead of time.
MINIMUM HOLDING LEVEL

The minimum permissible holding level provides a clearance of at least 300
m (984 ft) above obstacles in the holding area.The minimum holding altitude to be
published shall be rounded up to the nearest 50 m or 100 ft as appropriate.

Over high terrain or in mountainous areas, additional obstacle clearance up to a
total of 600 m (1 969 ft) is provided to accommodate the possible effects of turbulence,
down drafts and other meteorological phenomena on the performance of altimeters.

SIMULTANEOUS ILS OPERATIONS ON PARALLEL OR
NEAR-PARALLEL RUNWAYS

MODES OF OPERATION
There can be a variety of modes of operation associated with the use of parallel
or near-parallel instrument runways.

Modes One and Two — Simultaneous parallel instrument approaches
There are two basic modes of operation for approaches made to parallel runways:

Mode 1, Independent parallel approaches: In this mode, radar separation minima
between aircraft using adjacent ILS and/or MLS are not prescribed.

Mode 2, Dependent parallel approaches: In this mode, radar separation minima
between aircraft using adjacent ILS and/or MLS are prescribed.

Mode 3 — Simultaneous instrument departures

Mode 3, Independent parallel departures: In this mode, aircraft are departing in the
same direction from parallel runways simultaneously.

Note:-— When the minimum distance between two parallel runway centre lines is
less than the specified value dictated by wake turbulence considerations, the parallel
runways are considered as a single runway in regard to separation between departing
aircraft. A simultaneous dependent parallel departure mode of operation is therefore
not used.

Mode 4— Segregated parallel approaches/departures

337

AIR REGULATIONS

Mode 4, Segregated parallel operations: In this mode, one runway is used for approaches
and one runway is used for departures.

< WOT LEBS
TRAN Figen

338

--- Page 176 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

AREA NAVIGATION (RNAV) ARRIVAL AND APPROACH
PROCEDURES BASED ON VOR/DME
The term “flight management computer (FMC)” is used to denote the general category of
multi-sensor RNAV systems.

Area navigation (RNAV) approach procedures based on VOR/DME are assumed
to be based on one reference facility composed of a VOR and collocated DME equipment.
The reference facility will be indicated. The VOR/DME RNAV approach procedure is a
non-precision approach procedure.

ARRIVAL SEGMENT

Standard instrument arrivals (STARs) can be based on RNP criteria (limited to
RNP 1 or better) or on specific RNAV criteria. When specific criteria are used, the same
principles apply to the protection of all of the arrival phase. The FTT (Flight Technical
Tolerance), however, is assumed to be equal to:

a) 3.7 km (2.0 NM) until at 46 km (25 NM) from the IAF; and
b) 1.9 km (1.0 NM) after this point.

INITIAL APPROACH SEGMENT
When the procedure requires a track reversal, a racetrack pattern may be
established.

FINAL APPROACH SEGMENT
The final approach segment is generally aligned with the runway. The minimum
obstacle clearance in the primary area of the final approach segment is 75 m (246 ft).

Waypoints in the final approach
The FAF is defined by a fly-by waypoint. A flyover waypoint is also provided at
the runway threshold.

MISSED APPROACH SEGMENT

The missed approach waypoint (MAPt) is defined by a flyover waypoint. From the
earliest MAPt, the area splays at 15° on each side of the missed approach track, at least
until the SOC is reached. This allows for the limitations of some RNAV systems, and
the pilot’s workload at the beginning of the missed approach phase.A missed approach
holding fix (MAHF) defines the end of the missed approach segment. It is located at
or after the point where the aircraft, climbing at the minimum prescribed gradient,
reaches the minimum altitude for en route or holding, whichever is appropriate.

339

AIR REGULATIONS

ALTIMETER SETTING PROCEDURES

These procedures describe the method for providing adequate vertical separation
between aircraft and for providing adequate terrain clearance during all phases of a
flight. This method is based on the following basic principles:

a) States may specify a fixed altitude known as the transition altitude. In flight,
when an aircraft is at or below the transition altitude, its vertical position is
expressed in terms of altitude, which is determined from an altimeter set to sea
level pressure (QNH).

b) In flight above the transition altitude, the vertical position of an aircraft is
expressed in terms of flight levels, which are surfaces of constant atmospheric
pressure based on an altimeter setting of 1 013.2 hPa.

c) The change in reference from altitude to flight levels, and vice versa, is made:

1) atthe transition altitude, when climbing; and
2) at the transition level, when descending.

d) The transition level may be nearly coincident with the transition altitude to
maximize the number of flight levels available. Alternatively, the transition
level may be located 300 m (1000 ft) above the transition altitude to permit the
transition altitude and the transition level to be used concurrently in cruising
flight, with vertical separation ensured. The airspace between the transition level
and the transition altitude is called the transition layer.

e) Where no transition altitude has been established for the area, aircraft in the en-
route phase shall be flown at a flight level.

f) The adequacy of terrain clearance during any phase of a flight may be maintained
in any of several ways, depending upon the facilities available in a particular area.
The recommended methods in the order of preference are:

1) the use of current QNH reports from an adequate network of QNH reporting
stations;

2) the use of such QNH reports as are available, combined with other
meteorological information such as forecast lowest mean sea level pressure
for the route or portions thereof; and

8) where relevant current information is not available, the use of values of the
lowest altitudes or flight levels, derived from climatological data.

g) During the approach to land, terrain clearance may be determined by using:

1) the QNH altimeter setting (giving altitude); or
2) under specified circumstances a QFE setting (giving height above the QFE
datum).

These procedures apply to all IFR flights and to other flights which are operating
at specific cruising levels.

340

--- Page 177 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

System of flight levels: Flight level zero shall be located at the atmospheric
pressure level of 1 013.2 hPa. Consecutive flight levels shall be separated by a pressure
interval corresponding to at least 500 ft (152.4 m) in the standard atmosphere.

This does not preclude reporting intermediate levels in increments of 30 m
(100 ft).

Transition altitude: A transition altitude shall normally be specified for each
aerodrome by the State in which the aerodrome is located. Lowest transition altitude
in India is 4000 feet.

The height above the aerodrome of the transition altitude shall be as low as
possible but normally not less than 900 m (3 000 ft).

The calculated height of the transition altitude shall be rounded up to the next
full 300 m (1 000 ft).

PRE-FLIGHT OPERATIONAL TEST
QNH/QFE Setting:

1. With the aircraft at a known elevation on the aerodrome, set the altimeter pressure
scale to the current QNH/QFE setting.

2. Vibrate the instrument by tapping unless mechanical vibration is provided.

A serviceable altimeter indicates the elevation/height of the point selected, within a
tolerance of:

a) +20 mor 60 ft for altimeters with a test range of 0 to 9 000 m (0 to 30 000
ft); and

b) +25 mor 80 ft for altimeters with a test range of 0 to 15 000 m (0 to 50 000
ft).
SECONDARY SURVEILLANCE RADAR (SSR)

DEFINITIONS

Airborne collision avoidance system (ACAS), An aircraft system based on
secondary surveillance radar (SSR) transponder signals which operates independently
of ground-based equipment to provide advice to the pilot on potential conflicting
aircraft that are equipped with SSR transponders.

Note:— SSR transponders referred to above are those operating in Mode C or Mode 8S.

Secondary surveillance radar (SSR). A surveillance radar system which uses
transmitters/ receivers (interrogators) and transponders.

Surveillance Radar. Radar equipment used to determine the position of an aircraft
in range and azimuth.

341

AIR REGULATIONS

Interrogation modes (ground-to-air) : The uses of each mode shall be as follows:
1) Mode A - to elicit transponder replies for identity and surveillance.

2) Mode C — to elicit transponder replies for automatic pressure-altitude
transmission and surveillance.

TRANSPONDER OPERATING PROCEDURES

OPERATION OF TRANSPONDERS

GENERAL

When an aircraft carries a serviceable transponder, the pilot shall operate the
transponder at all times during flight, regardless of whether the aircraft is within or
outside airspace where secondary surveillance radar (SSR) is used for ATS purposes.

Squawk codes are four-digit octal numbers; the dials on a transponder read from
zero to seven, inclusive. Thus the lowest possible squawk is 0000 and the highest is
7777.

Except in case of emergency, communication failure or unlawful interference,
the pilot shall:

a) operate the transponder and select Mode A codes as directed by the ATC unit
with which contact is being made; or

b) operate the transponder on Mode A codes as prescribed on the basis of regional
air navigation agreements; or

c) in the absence of any ATC directions or regional air navigation agreements,
operate the transponder on Mode A Code 2000.

When the aircraft carries serviceable Mode C equipment, the pilot shall
continuously operate this mode, unless otherwise directed by ATC.

When requested by ATC to specify the capability of the transponder aboard
the aircraft, pilots shall indicate this in item 10 of the flight plan by inserting the
appropriate letter prescribed for the purpose.

When requested by ATC to CONFIRM SQUAWK (code), the pilot shall:
a) verify the Mode A code setting on the transponder;
b) __reselect the assigned code if necessary; and
c) confirm to ATC the setting displayed on the controls of the transponder.
Pilots shall not SQUAWK IDENT unless requested by ATC.

842

--- Page 178 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

EMERGENCY PROCEDURES

The pilot of an aircraft in a state of emergency shall set the transponder to Mode
A Code 7700 unless ATC has previously directed the pilot to operate the transponder
on a specified code. In the latter case, the pilot shall continue to use the specified
code unless otherwise advised by ATC. However, a pilot may select Mode A Code 7700
whenever there is a specific reason to believe that this would be the best course of
action.

COMMUNICATION FAILURE PROCEDURES

The pilot of an aircraft losing two-way communications shall set the transponder
to Mode A Code 7600.

A controller who observes an SSR response indicating selection of the
communications failure code will determine the extent of the failure by instructing the
pilot to SQUAWK IDENT or to change code. If it is determined that the aircraft receiver
is functioning, further control of the aircraft will be continued using code changes or
IDENT transmission to acknowledge receipt of clearances. Different procedures may
be applied to Mode S equipped aircraft in areas of Mode S coverage.

UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH AIRCRAFT IN FLIGHT

If there is unlawful interference with an aircraft in flight, the pilot-in-command
shall attempt to set the transponder to Mode A Code 7500 in order to indicate the
situation. If circumstances so warrant, Code 7700 should be used instead.

If a pilot has selected Mode A Code 7500 and has been requested to confirm this
code by ATC, the pilot shall, according to circumstances, either confirm this or not
reply at all.

If the pilot does not reply, ATC will take this as confirmation that the use of Code
7500 is not an inadvertent false code selection.

TRANSPONDER FAILURE PROCEDURES WHEN THE CARRIAGE OF A
FUNCTIONING TRANSPONDER IS MANDATORY

In case of a transponder failure after departure, ATC units shall attempt to
provide for continuation of the flight to the destination aerodrome in accordance with
the flight plan. Pilots may, however, expect to comply with specific restrictions.

ad 3

AIRBORNE COLLISION AVOIDANCE SYSTEM (ACAS)

GENERAL

Airborne collision avoidance system (ACAS) indications shall be used by pilots in
the avoidance of potential collisions, the enhancement of situational awareness, and
the active search for, and visual acquisition of, conflict ing traffic.

Nothing in the procedures specified for “Use of ACAS indicators”, shall prevent
pilots-in-command from exercising their best judgment and full authority in the choice
of the best course of action to resolve a traffic conflict or avert a potential collision.

343

AIR REGULATIONS

USE OF ACAS INDICATORS
The indications generated by ACAS shall be used by pilots in conformity with
the following safety considerations:

a) pilots shall not manoeuvre their aircraft in response to traffic advisories (TAs)
only;

TAs are intended to alert pilots to the possibility of a resolution advisory (RA), to
enhance situational awareness, and to assist in visual acquisition of conflicting traffic.
However, visually acquired traffic may not be the same traffic causing a TA. Visual
perception of an encounter may be misleading, particularly at night.

The above restriction in the use of TAs is due to the limited bearing accuracy and
to the difficulty in interpreting altitude rate from displayed traffic information.

b) on receipt of a TA, pilots shall use all available information to prepare for
appropriate action if an RA occurs; and

c) in the event of an RA, pilots shall:

1) respond immediately by following the RA as indicated, unless doing so
would jeopardize the safety of the aeroplane;

Stall warning, wind shear, and ground proximity warning system alerts
have precedence over ACAS.

Visually acquired traffic may not be the same traffic causing an RA. Visual
perception of an encounter may be misleading, particularly at night.

2) follow the RA even if there is a conflict between the RA and an air traffic
control (ATC) instruction to manoeuvre;

3) not manoeuvre in the opposite sense to an RA;

In the case of an ACAS-ACAS coordinated encounter, the RAs complement
each other in order to reduce the potential for collision. Manoeuvres, or
lack of manoeuvres, that result in vertical rates opposite to the sense of an
RA could result in a collision with the threat aircraft.

4) as soon as possible, as permitted by flight crew workload, notify the
appropriate ATC unit of the RA, including the direction of any deviation
from the current ATC instruction or clearance;

Unless informed by the pilot, ATC does not know when ACAS issues RAs.
It is possible for ATC to issue instructions that are unknowingly contrary
to ACAS RA indications. Therefore, it is important that ATC be notified
when an ATC instruction or clearance is not being followed because it
conflicts with an RA.

5) promptly comply with any modified RAs;
6) limit the alterations of the flight path to the minimum extent necessary to
comply with the RAs;

344

--- Page 179 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

7) promptly return to the terms of the ATC instruction or clearance when the
conflict is resolved; and

8) notify ATC when returning to the current clearance.

ACAS OPERATIONS

a)

b)

Surveillance:

1) —ACAS interrogates other transponder-equipped aircraft within a nominal
range of 26 km (14 NM); and

2) ACAS surveillance range can be reduced in geographic areas with a
large number of ground interrogators and/or ACAS-equipped aircraft. A
minimum surveillance range of 8.5 km (4.5 NM) is guaranteed for ACAS
aircraft that are airborne.

Collision avoidance:

1)  TAscan be issued against any transponder-equipped aircraft that responds
to the ICAO Mode C interrogations, even if the aircraft does not have
altitude-reporting capability;

2) RAs can be issued only against aircraft that are reporting altitude and in
the vertical plane only;

3) RAs issued against an ACAS-equipped intruder are coordinated to ensure
that complementary RAs are issued;

4) failure to respond to an RA deprives the aircraft of the collision protection
provided by its ACAS. Additionally, in ACAS-ACAS encounters, it also
restricts the choices available to the other aircraft's ACAS and thus
renders the other aircraft's ACAS less effective than if the first aircraft
were not ACAS-equipped; and

5) manoeuvring in a direction opposite to that indicated by an RA is likely to
result in further reduction in separation. This is particularly true in the
case of an ACAS-ACAS coordinated encounter.

345

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

PANS-OPS means:

A) Procedures for Air Navigation Services - Aircraft operations

B) Pilots Alternate Navigational Systems and Operational Procedures
C) Procedures for Air Navigation Systems - Airfield operations

The document that specifies the recommendations for instrument procedures
is called...

A) PANS OPS Doc 8168

B) The Convention of Chicago

C) The Air Navigation bulletin

Which of the following defines transition altitude?

A) _ The altitude above which the vertical position of an aircraft is determined by
reference to local QHN

B) The altitude below which the vertical position of an aircraft is determined by
reference to QNH

C) The altitude at which 1013 hPa is set and vertical position then reported as a
flight level

The Transition Level:

A) _ Is published for the aerodrome in the Section ENR of the AIP

B) Shall be the lowest flight level available for use above the transition altitude
C) Is calculated and declared for an approach by the Pilot-in command

During flight through the transition layer the vertical position of the aircraft
should be expressed as

A) Altitude above mean sea level during climb.

B) Either altitude above mean sea level or flight level during climb

C) Altitude above mean sea level during descent

Transition from altitude to flight level, and vice-versa is done:

A)  Attransition level during climb and transition altitude during descent
B) At transition altitude during climb and transition level during descent
C) Only at transition altitude

Which of the following cruising levels would you select under the following
conditions: True track 358°, variation 3°E, deviation 2°W?

A) FL6S
B) FL75
C) FL70

346

--- Page 180 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

In the vicinity of an aerodrome that is going to be used by the aircraft the
vertical position of the aircraft shall be expressed in:

A) _ Altitude above sea level on or above the transition altitude

B) Flight level on or below the transition level

C) Altitude above sea level on or below the transition altitude

The vertical position of an aircraft at or below the transition altitude will be
reported:

A) _ As flight level

B) As altitude

C) As height

The transition altitude of an aerodrome should not be below:
A)  4000ft

B)  1000ft

C) 1500ft

The pilot of a departing aircraft flying under IFR shall change the altimeter
setting from QNH to standard setting 1013.25hPA when passing:

A) _ Transition layer

B) The level specified by ATC

C) _ Transition altitude

In the standard atmosphere FL150 is equivalent to:
A) 15000 metres

B) 4550 metres

C) 455 metres

A pre-flight altimeter check should be carried out:
A)  Onthe apron

B) Onthe manoeuvring area

C) Ataknown elevation on the aerodrome

Which of the following correctly lists special purpose codes that are to be used
in conjunction with Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR)?

A) _ Distress 7600, Hijacking 7500, Communication failure 7700

B) Distress 7500, Hijacking 7700, Communication failure 7600

C) Distress 7700, Hijacking 7500, Communication failure 7600

When acknowledging model/code setting instructions, pilots shall:
A) Use only the word ROGER

B) Useonly the word WILCO ©

C) Read back the mode and code to be set

347

16.

17.

18,

19.

20.

21.

22.

AIR REGULATIONS

Pilots shall not operate the SSR special position indicator (IDENT) feature
unless:

A) Requested by ATC

B) They operate a transponder with Mode C

C) They operate within controlled airspace

When the aircraft carries serviceable Mode C equipment, the pilot:

A) _ Shall continuously operate this mode only when the aircraft is within controlled
airspace

B) Shall continuously operate this mode regardless of ATC instructions

C) Shall continuously operate this mode unless otherwise directed by ATC

When an aircraft carries a serviceable transponder, the pilot shall operate the

transponder:

A)  Atall times during flight, regardless of whether the aircraft is within or outside
airspace where SSR is used for ATS purposes

B) — Only when the aircraft is flying within controlled airspace

C) Only when the aircraft is flying within airspace where SSR is used for ATS
purposes

Your transponder code assigned by ATC is 5320. In flight, in case of radio
communications failure, you will squawk code:

A) A7620 Mode C

B) A7600 Mode C

C) A0020 Mode C

The pilot of an aircraft losing two-way communication shail set the transponder
to Mode A Code:

A) 2000
B) 7700
C) 7600

When the aircraft carries serviceable Mode C transponder, the pilot shall
continuously operate this mode:

A) Regardless of ATC instructions

B) Unless otherwise directed by ATC

C) Only when directed by ATC

During a pre-flight a SSR transponder is found to be inoperative and immediate
repair is not possible:

A) _ A flight to the closest airport, where a repair can be made is allowed

B) A flight can not be made

C) It is necessary to specify this failure in the appropriate field of the flight plan

348

--- Page 181 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

When an aircraft is subjected to unlawful interference, the pilot-in-command
shall indicate the situation by setting the transponder to:

A) 7500.
B) 7700.
C) 7000.

On receipt of a TA, pilots shall:

A) — Respond immediately by following the TA as indicated

B) Not manoeuvre their aircraft in response to traffic advisories (TAs) only
C) Notify the appropriate ATC unit of the TA

Airborne collision avoidance system (ACAS) indications shall be used by pilots
in:

A) Both B) and C) are correct.

B) |The enhancement of situational awareness,

C) The active search for, and visual acquisition of, conflicting traffic.

What are the two main objective of altimeter setting?

A) To read height and barometric pressure
B) QNH to be set in the vicinity of the aerodrome and QFE en route
C) To provide adequate terrain clearance and vertical separation

Which of the following correctly defines altitude?

A) _ Vertical position with reference to MSL

B) Vertical position with reference to aerodrome elevation
C) Vertical position with reference to touchdown

Which of the following correctly defines height?

A) _ Vertical position with reference to MSL

B) _ Vertical position with reference to aerodrome elevation
C) Vertical position with reference to touchdown

Which of the following correctly defines flight level?

A) _ Vertical position with reference to MSL
B) Vertical position with reference to aerodrome elevation
C) Vertical position with reference to the standard pressure level

if the QNH is 991 Mb where is FL? (Assume 1 Mb= 30 ft)

A) Below sea level!
B) 660 ft above mean sea level
C) 660 ft above the transition level

349

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

AIR REGULATIONS

Which of the following is the location of FL?

A) _ The first flight level above the transition level

B) The level defined with reference to a QNH of 1013.25mb
C) The atmospheric pressure level of 1013.25mb

What is the relationship between IFR and VFR flight level?

A) For given mag track, the VFR level is the IFR level plus 500’ if below FL290

B) _IFRlevels are flown on mag tracks from 000 to 179 an VFR levels from 180 to
359

C) VFR levels may be flown in VMC or IMC, but IFR levels must only be flown in
IMC

At what point in a flight is the QNH communicated to the pilot by ATC?
A)  Onengine start

B) Inthe taxi elearance

C) Inthe ATC clearance

If you are flying outside an aerodrome traffic zone, what are you required to set

on your altimeter sub scale ?

A) Regional QFF

B) The lowest forecast pressure setting with respect to MSL for the area in which
you are flying

C) The local QNH obtained from FIS or the nearest aerodrome

If you are flying en route below the transition level but are well briefed with

regard to safety altitude, from where would you get altimeter setting information

whilst airborne?

A) You only need the departure aerodrome and destination aerodrome QNH and
then interpolate the difference whilst en route

B) Ask the met man to forecast the QNH for the route before you take off

C) Ask the FIS controller for local aerodrome QNHs

You are approaching an aerodrome to land and call the approach controller

at 10nm from the edge of the ATZ. Your flight conditions are VMC and you are

flying VFR. When would you expect to be advised to set the aerodrome QNH?

A) On initial contact the app controller will pass QNH and tell you what altitude to
fly at

B) Onclearance to enter the traffic pattern established for a visual join to land

C) When descending below the transition altitude

350

--- Page 182 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

You test your altimeter with aerodrome QNH set. What would a serviceable

altimeter read?

A) The height of the aeroplane above the datum

B) The elevation of the position of the aeroplane plus the height of the altimeter
static vent \

C) ‘The altitude of the aeroplane above the datum

In selecting a flight level for a flight, which of the following should be taken into

consideration ?

1. Adequate terrain clearance is ensured

2. ATC requirements (Danger Areas, restricted airspace etc.) are complied with

3. Minimum traffic separation is ensured

4. Adequate separation from VFR traffic is ensured (differential flight levels
applied)

5. The appropriate flight level in accordance with the table of flight levels

The level chosen complies with the table of cruising levels

A) 1,2and5

B) All the above

C) 1,2,3and5

What is the minimum gradient for missed approach procedure?

A) 3.3%
B) 2.8%
C) 2.5%

You are entering a FIR where SSR is used from an area where SSR is not used.
What would you squawk?

A) Standby
B) A/1234+C
C) A/2000+C

Your aircraft is subjected to unlawful interference (hijacking). Without upsetting
the man with the gun, what would you squawk?

A) — Either A/7700 or A/7500 depending upon the situation

B) A/7600+C

C) A/7500+C

What are you required to do if you become aware that your transponder has
failed?

A) Switch the set off
B) Try recycling the transponder and set 7777 to maximise the response
C) Tell ATC

351

43.

44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

AIR REGULATIONS

Which of the following is an invalid squawk?

A) A/7777+C
B) A/8765+C
C) A/2000+C

On a single SSR control box/selector system (ie no changeover switch), what
is the correct procedure for changing squawk?

A) Squawk ‘standby’, then change the code; then squawk ‘normal’.

B) Squawk ‘off’, then change the code; then Squawk ‘normal’.

C) Only change one digit at a time

What does the abbreviation ACAS mean?

A) _ Advisory, Counselling and Arbitration Service
B) Airborne Collision Avoidance System

C) Automatic Collision Avoidance System

What does the abbreviation OIS mean?

A) Obstacle identification surface
B) Obstacle in surface

.C) Obstacle identification slope

What does the abbreviation DER mean?
A) Departure end of runway

B) Distance end of runway

C) Departure end of route

The MSA, which must be established around a navigation facility, is in general
valid within a sector of:

A)  25NM
B) 30NM
C) 10NM

What is defined as the portion of a flight in which the aircraft descends below
1000 ft above the relevant DH or MDH?

A) Glide path

B) Approach to landing

C) Go around / Missed Approach

A radial is:

A) Amagnetic bearing to or from a VOR station, depending on whether the aircraft
is inbound or outbound to or from the VOR

B) Amagnetic bearing to a VOR station

C) Amagnetic bearing extending from a VOR station

352

--- Page 183 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

51.

52.

53.

54,

55.

56.

57.

Acircling approach is:

A) A flight manoeuvre to be performed only under radar vectoring
B)  Acontact flight manoeuvre

C) Avvisual flight manoeuvre keeping the runway in sight

What is the meaning of MEHT?
A) Maximum eye height
B) Minimum eye height
C) Mean height over threshold

OCH for a precision approach is defined as:

A) The lowest height above mean sea level of the relevant runway used in
establishing compliance with appropriate obstacle clearance requirements

B) The lowest altitude above the aerodrome elevation used in establishing
compliance with appropriate obstacle clearance requirements

C) The lowest height above the elevation of the relevant runway threshold , at
which a missed approach must be initiated to ensure compliance with the
appropriate obstacle clearance criteria

The approach categories of aircraft are based upon:
A) 1.3 times the stalling speed in clean configuration at minimum certified landing

mass

B) 1.3 times the stalling speed in the landing configuration at minimum certified
landing mass

C) 1.3 times the stalling speed in the landing configuration at maximum certified
landing mass

Maximum permissible bank angle in a holding pattern is degrees:

A) 35

B) 30

C) 25

The term used to describe the visual phase of flight after completing an
instrument approach, to bring an aircraft into position for landing on runway
which is not suitably located for straight-in approach, is:

A) Visual manoeuvring (circling).

B) Contact approach.

C) Aerodrome traffic pattern.

In a straight departure, the initial departure track is of the alignment of the
runway centreline within:

A) 25°
B) 12.5°
C) 15°

353

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

AIR REGULATIONS

In an instrument departure procedure the minimum obstacle clearance at the
departure end of runway equals:

A)  Oft
B) 3.3% gradient
C) = 35ft

We can distinguish two types of departure routes. During a straight departure
the initial departure track is within:

A) 15° of the alignment of the runway centreline

B) 10° of the alignment of the runway centreline

C) 25° of the alignment of the runway centreline

Ifin an instrument departure procedure the track to be followed by the aeroplane
is published, the pilot is expected:

A) — To correct for known wind to remain within the protected airspace

B) Torequest from ATC different heading for wind correction

C) —_Toignore the wind and proceed on a heading equal to the track

in general, which is the main factor that dictates the design of an instrument
departure procedure?

A) Navigation aids

B) The terrain surrounding the airport

C) ATC requirements

During an omni-directional departure, what height are you required to climb to
before turning onto the desired track?

A) _ Transition altitude

B) 120 m (394 ft)

C) 1000 ft

The main factor that dictates in general the design of an instrument departure
procedure is:

A) ATC availability and requirements

B) availability of navigation aids

C) _ the terrain surrounding the aerodrome

SID terminates at:

A) __ the first fix of the en-route phase.

B) point 15 nms from DER on departure leg.
C) _ fix decided by the pilot before reaching TOC

354

--- Page 184 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

A public transport aircraft shall not take-off unless the following minima for the
departure airfield are satisfactory:

A) _ cloud ceiling and RVR

B) cloud base and RVR

C) MDH and RVR

Obstacle clearance for an ILS approach is based on the assumption that the

pilot does not deviate from the centreline more than:

A) _ half scale deflection of the localizer indicator

B) _ full scale deflection of the localizer indicator

C) half scale deflection of the glidepath indicator and horizontal 35° off the
centreline

Who establishes the OCA/H (Obstacle Clearance Altitude/Height) for an
approach procedure?

A) _ the operator

B) _ the pilot in command

C) the state

If visual reference is lost while circling to land from an instrument approach, it
is expected that the pilot will make an initial climbing turn towards the:

A) _ Final missed approach track

B) MAP

C) Landing runway

Acircling approach is:

A)  Avisual flight manoeuvre keeping the runway in sight

B)  Avvisual flight manoeuvre to be conducted only in IMC

C) A flight manoeuvre to be performed only under radar vectoring

When the visual manoeuvring (circling) area has been established the obstacle
clearance altitude/height (OCA/H) is determined:

A) — Only for categories C, D and E aircraft

B) For each category of aircraft, and it may be different for each one of them

C) For all categories of aircraft, and it is the same for all of them

On a non-precision approach a so-called “straight-in-approach” is considered
acceptable, if the angle between the final approach track and the runway
centreline is:

A) 30 degrees or less

B) 40 degrees or less

C) 20 degrees or less

355

72.

73.

74,

75.

76.

77.

ATR REGULATIONS

If contact is lost with the runway on the downwind leg of a circling manoeuvre,

what actions should be taken?

A) _ Initiate a missed approach

B) Turn towards the inner marker for the runway in use, maintaining circling
altitude

C) _ If you have other visual cues, continue with ground contact

Minimum sector altitudes are determined by the inbound radial in relation to
the IAF. These sectors are established for a distance from the IAF of:

A) 20NM
B) 5NM
C) 25NM

A “precision approach” is a direct instrument approach...
A) _ using bearing, elevation and distance information
B) carried out by a crew of at least two pilots trained with a specific working method

C) _ using at least one source of bearing information and one source of elevation or
distance information

The term used to describe the visual phase of flight after completing an
instrument approach, to bring an aircraft into position for landing on runway
which is not suitably located for straight-in approach is:

A) Visual approach

B) Visual manoeuvring (circling)

C) Aerodrome traffic pattern

In a precision approach (ILS), the final approach segment begins at the:

A) IF
B) AF
C) FAP

Under which conditions may an aircraft on a straight-in-VOR approach continue

its descend below the OCA?

A) When the aircraft has the control tower in sight

B) | When the aircraft is in visual contact with the ground and with the runway lights
in sight

C) When the aircraft is in contact with the ground but not with the runway in sight
yet

356

--- Page 185 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

A turn executed by the aircraft during the initial approach between the end of
the outbound track and the beginning of the intermediate or final approach
track is a:

A) Procedure turn

B) Base tum

C) Race track

Amanoeuvre in which a turn is made away from a designated track followed by
a turn in the opposite direction to permit the aircraft to intercept and proceed
along the reciprocal of the designated track is called a:

A) Procedure turn

B) Reversal track

C) Race track

You are on an IFR flight executing a circling approach. A descend below the
MDA should not be made until:

1 the pilot has the landing threshold in sight

2 visual reference has been established and can be maintained

3 the required obstacle clearance can be maintained and a landing can be made
The combination regrouping all the correct statements is:

A) 1,2
B) 1,2,3
C) 2,3

In an offset entry into an omni directional racetrack procedure, the time on the
30° offset track is limited to:

A) 1 minutes 30 seconds

B) 2minutes

C) 1 minute

In an approach procedure, a descent or climb conducted in a holding pattern is
called:

A) — Procedure turn

B) Based turn

C) Shuttle

Which are the phases of a missed approach procedure?
A) Arrival, initial, intermediate and final

B) Initial, intermediate and final

C) Initial and final

857

85.

86.

87.

89.

90.

AIR REGULATIONS

When determining the OCA for a precision approach, obstacle height is
referenced to:

A) MSL

B) Threshold

C) highest obstacle within 25 nm of aerodrome

What is gradient for departure runway?

A) 2.5%

B) 2.8%

C) 3.3%

The ILS glide path is normally intercepted between:
A) 3and7NM

B) 3and10NM
C) 5and10NM

The factors considered in the calculations of DA /DH are:

A) The OCA/H based on the highest obstacle in the final approach path only, plus
a margin for height loss on any go around

B) The OCA/H based on the highest obstacle in the missed approach path only
plus an allowance for height loss on any go around

C) The OCAIH based on the highest obstacle in the approach or missed approach
paths including an allowance for aircraft speed and height loss on any go
around, plus a margin for operational factors

What is the obstacle clearance in the intermediate approach segment?
A) 300 m (984 ft)

B) 200 m (656 ft)

C) Reducing from 300 m to 150 m

Who is establishing the aerodrome operational minima for instrument
approaches?

A) | The appropriate authority of the State of the aircraft operator

B) The operator

2) The appropriate authority of the State of the aerodrome

What is the primary area during the intermediate section of an instrument

approach?

A) 3/4 of the total width of the airspace used to determine the minimum obstacle
clearance for the approach

B) 1/2 of the total width of the airspace used to determine the minimum obstacle
clearance for the approach

C)  10NM either side of the approach path

358

--- Page 186 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS AIR REGULATIONS

99. When you are asked to hold on a non standard holding fix (eg en route) what
direction are the turns made?

A) At pilots discretion

91. In relation to the three entry sectors, the entry into the holding pattern shall be
according to:

A) Course
B) . Track B) Right
C) Heading C) Left
92. Related to the three entry sectors in a holding pattern, there is a zone of 100. Standard airway holding pattern below 14 000 ft 7
flexibility on either side of the sectors boundaries of: A) _ Right hand turns / 1.5 minutes outbound
A) 5 B) Left hand turns / 1 minute outbound
B) 20° C) Right hand turns / 1 minute outbound
C) 10°

93. What is the outbound timing in a holding pattern above FL 140?
A) 2minutes
B) 1 minute
C) 1 minute 30 seconds

94. Ina holding pattern all turns are to be made at a:
A) _ Rate of 3°/sec or at a bank angle of 25°, which ever requires the lesser bank
B) Rate of 3°/sec
C) Rate of 3°/sec or at a bank angle of 20°, which ever requires the lesser bank

95. Inastandard holding pattern turns are made:
A) _ To the left
B) _ To the right
C) Inadirection depending on the wind direction

96. What is the rate of turn/bank angle required for turns in a holding pattern?
A) 15 degrees bank angle maximum
B) 3 degrees per second
C) 5 degrees per second

97. What obstacle clearance is guaranteed at a range of 5 nm from the edge of the
holding area?

A) Nil
B) 100m
C) 300m

98. An expected approach time is given:
A) When an aircraft is instructed to hold
B) Once an aircraft has been holding for 20 minutes
C) Onall flights

359 360

--- Page 187 ---

PROCEDURES FOR AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS

ANSWERS

f+[2[3]4]5]6|]7]e8|9|m]/ 1] 2) 3)
PATA Te [eB fe yet atc{syatye)] se fete
(15 [16 | 17 | 18 | 19 | 20 | 21] 22] 23| 24] 25] 26 | 27 | 28
pe {Ate fa fe ie[eyalfayelal ec [ae
-20 [30 | 31 | 32 [33 | 34 | 35] 36 | 37] 38] 30] 40 | 41] 42)
pe Tate fats ieic}sliejatc]{ calc
(43 [44 [45 [46 [47 [48 | 49] 50] 51] 52] 63 | 54 | 55 | 56)

pByATe lala fal eyel{efeict ce |cfal
57 [58 | 59 | 60 | 61 | 62 | 63] 64] 65| 66] 67 | 68 | 69 | 70)
pe ya Tata [eB fete aAyavatel] c fala

71 | 72 | 73 | 74 | 75 | 76 | 77 | 78 | 79| 80| 81 | 82 | 83 | 84 |

85 | 86_| 87 | 88_| 89 | 90 | 91 | 92 | 93] 94] 95 | 96 | 97 | 98 |

361

AIR REGULATIONS

362

--- Page 188 ---

14

NATIONAL LAW

THE AIRCRAFT ACT, 1934

It extends to the whole of India and applies also-
(a) to citizens of India wherever they may be;
(b) to, and to the persons on, aircraft registered in India wherever they may be;

(c) to, and to the persons on, aircraft registered outside India but for the time
being in or over India; and

(d) to an aircraft operated by a person who is not a citizen of India but has his
principal place of business or permanent residence in India.

3. Power of Central Government to exempt certain aircraft:—

The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt from
all or any of the provisions of this Act any aircraft or class of aircraft and any person
or class of persons, or may direct that such provisions shall apply to such aircraft or
persons subject to such modifications as may be specified in the notification.

8. Power to detain aircraft:—

(1) Any authority authorised in this behalf by the a[Central Government] may
detain any aircraft, if in the opinion of such authority-

(a) having regard to the nature of an intended flight, the flight of such
aircraft would involve danger to persons in the aircraft or to any other
persons or property, or

(b) such detention is necessary to secure compliance with any of the
provisions of this Act or the rules applicable to such aircraft; or such
detention is necessary to prevent a contravention of any rule made
under clause (h) or clause (i) of sub-section(2) of section 5 or to
implement any order made by any Court.

(2) Subject to the provisions of section 14, the Central Government] may,
by notification in the Official Gazette make rules regulating all matters
incidental or subsidiary to the exercise of this power.

363

AIR REGULATIONS

9. Wreck and Salvage:—

The provisions of Part XIII of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 relating to Wreck
and Salvage shall apply to aircraft on or over the sea or tidal waters as they apply to
ships, and the owner of an aircraft shall be entitled to a reasonable reward for salvage
services rendered by the aircraft in like manner as the owner of a ship.

10. Penalty for act in contravention of rule made under this Act:—

(1) Ifany person contravenes any provision of any rule made under clause (1) of
sub-section (2) of section 5 prohibiting or regulating the carriage in aircraft
of arms, explosives or other dangerous goods, or when required under the
rules made under that clause to give information in relation to any such
goods gives information which is false and which he either knows or believes
to be false or does not believe to be true he, and if he is not the owner,
the owner also (unless the owner proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge, consent or connivance) shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees

(1A) Ifany person contravenes any provision of any rule made under clause (qq) of
sub-section (2) of section 5 prohibiting the slaughter and flaying of animals
and of depositing rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter
within a radius of ten kilometers from the aerodrome reference point, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both.

(2) In making any other rule under section 5 or in making any rule under section
4, section 7, section 8, section 8A or section 8B, the Central Government
may direct that a breach of it shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
period which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten
lakh rupees, or with both.

11A. Penalty for failure to comply with directions issued under section 5A:—

If any person willfully fails to comply with any direction issued under section 5A,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both.

11B. Penalty for failure to comply with directions issued under section 9A:—

(1) If any person willfully fails to comply with any direction contained in
any notification issued under section 9A, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which
may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section(1), if any person fails to
demolish any building or structure or cut any tree or fails to reduce the
height of any building, structure or tree in pursuance of any direction
contained in any notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 9A
within the period specified in the notification, then, subject to such rules as

364

--- Page 189 ---

NATIONAL LAW

the Central Government may make in this behalf, it shall be competent for
any officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf to demolish
such building or structure or cut such tree or reduce the height of such
building, structure or tree:

17. Bar of certain suits:—

; No suit shall be brought in any Civil Court in respect of trespass or in respect of
nuisance by reason only of the flight of aircraft over any property at a height above the
ground which having regard to wind, weather and all the circumstances of the case is
reasonable, or by reason only of the ordinary incidents of such flight.

18. Saving for acts done in good faith under the Act:—

No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

365

AIR REGULATIONS

AIRCRAFT RULES, 1937

1. Short title and extent:—
(1) These rules may be called the Aircraft Rules, 1937.

(2) They extend to the whole of India and apply also (unless the contrary
intention appears) -

(a) to, and to persons on, aircraft registered in India wherever they may
be, except cases falling under sub-rule(4);

(b) to, and to persons on, all aircraft for the time being in or over India :

Provided that in the case of aircraft registered in a country other than India, the
regulations of that country relating to registration, license of personnel, airworthiness
and log books shall apply in place of the provisions contained in Parts IV, V, VI and IX
of these Rules :

Provided further that the foregoing proviso shall not apply to aircraft registered in
any country whose regulations are not based on standards at least equal to the minimum
standards established from time to time under the Convention on International Civil
Aviation opened for signature at Chicago on the 7th December, 1944, and the cases
falling under sub-rule(8).

(2A) In case of aircraft registered in a contracting State other than India and
operated pursuant to an agreement for the lease, charter or interchange of
the aircraft or any similar arrangement by an operator who has his principal
place of business, or, if has no such place of business, his permanent
residence in another contracting State than India, the regulations of the
other contracting State relating to registration, licensing of personnel,
airworthiness and log books shall apply in place of the provisions contained
in Parts IV, V, VI and IX of these rules, provided that an agreement has
been reached between the Government of State of registry of aircraft
and the government of the other contracting State relating to transfer of
functions and duties pursuant to Article 83 of the Convention and the same
has been officially notified to the Government of India or the International
Civil Aviation Organisation. The extent of application of these rules to such
aircraft shall be as per the agreement between the two Governments.

(8) These rules shall also apply to aircraft registered in a contracting State and
operated pursuant to an agreement for the lease, charter or interchange of
the aircraft or any similar arrangement by an operator who has his principal
place of business, or, if he has no such place of business, his permanent
residence in India, provided that an agreement has been reached between
the government of the State of registry of the Aircraft and the Government
of India in regard to transfer of functions and duties pursuant to Article 83
of the convention. The extent of application of these rules to such aircraft
shall be as per the agreement between the two Governments.

366

--- Page 190 ---

NATIONAL LAW

(4) These rules shall not apply to aircraft registered in India and operated
pursuant to an agreement for the lease, charter or interchange of aircraft
or any similar arrangement by an operator who has his principal place of
business or if he has no such place of business, his permanent residence in
a contracting State, provided that an agreement has been reached between
the Government of India and the Government of that contracting state
in regard to transfer of functions and duties pursuant to Article 83 of the
Convention. The extent of non-application of these rules to such aircraft
shall be as per the agreement between the two Governments.

2. Nationality of aircraft :—

An aircraft shall be deemed to possess the nationality of the State on the register
of which it is entered.
3. Definitions and Interpretation :— See chapter 1.
4. Use and operation of aircraft:—

No person shall use or operate or assist in using or operating an aircraft save in
accordance with these rules.
5. Registration and nationality and registration marks:—

Subject to the provisions of rule 33, no person shall fly, or assist in flying, any
aircraft unless -

(a) it has been registered, and

(b) it bears its nationality and registrations marks and the name and residence
of the owner affixed or painted thereon in accordance with rule 37 or, in the
case of aircraft registered elsewhere than in India, in accordance with the
regulations of the State in which it is registered:

Provided that the prohibition imposed by this rule shall not apply to aircraft flown

in accordance with the special permission in writing of the Central Government and
subject to any conditions and limitations which may be specified in such permission.

5A. Prohibited Flight:—
Except under, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of, a permit issued
by the Director-General of Civil Aviation -
(1) no aircraft registered in India shall leave India for the purpose of a flight to
a place outside India;

(2) no aircraft shall undertake a flight to any territory which the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a
prohibited territory.

Note:— For the purpose of this rule, foreign aircraft falling under sub-rule(8) of rule 1
shall be deemed as aircraft registered in India and Indian aircraft falling under sub-
rule(4) of rule 1 shall be deemed as aircraft not registered in India.

367

AIR REGULATIONS

6. Licensing of personnel:—

Every aircraft shall carry and be operated by the personnel prescribed in
Part V and such personnel shall be licensed in the manner prescribed in that part and
in Schedule II.

Provided that in the case of an aircraft not registered in India, such personnel
shall be licensed in accordance with the regulations in force in the State in which the
aircraft is registered.

6A. Type of aircraft to be included in rating:—

No person shall fly as pilot of an aircraft which is not included or entered in the
aircraft rating of the licence except as provided in rules 6B and 6C.
6B. Flights to qualify for extension of a licence:—

The holder of a pilot’s licence may fly within the Indian territory as pilot of an
aircraft of type which is not included in the aircraft rating of his licence for the purpose
of qualifying for the inclusion of such type.

6C. Flights for testing and other non-revenue specific special purposes:—

The Director-General may authorise the holder of a licence to fly an aircraft not
entered in the aircraft rating of the licence, for the purpose of testing or non-passenger-
carrying flight subject to the terms and conditions of such authorisation, and the
authorisation shall be limited in validity to the time needed to complete the testing or
the specific flight.

7. Documents to be carried on aircraft:—

(1) No person shall fly an aircraft unless valid documents, as required by the
law of the country in which the aircraft is registered, are carried on board
and are kept in such form and manner as laid down by that country.

(2) An aircraft registered in India shall carry on board valid documents as
required by these rules:

7A. Prohibition of carriage of persons without passport:

(1) No person-in-charge of any aircraft shall allow such aircraft to enter India
from a place outside India unless all persons on board the aircraft are in
possession of valid passports as required by rules for the time being in force
made under the Indian Passport Act, 1920 (XXXIV of 1920).

(2) Where an aircraft is brought into India in contravention of sub-rule (1), any
authority empowered by the Central Government generally or specially in
this behalf may direct the owner or the person in-charge of the aircraft to
take on board and remove from India, or otherwise arrange for the immediate
removal from India of the person or persons without valid passports, and
the owner, or as the case may be, the person-in-charge, of the aircraft shall
comply with such directions.

368

--- Page 191 ---

NATIONAL LAW

7B. Carriage of Cock-pit Check Lists in aircraft:—

Every aircraft registered in India shall carry Cock-pit Check Lists and Emergency
Check Lists specified by the Director-General for that particular type of aircraft. Such
lists shall be carried in the cock-pit of the aircraft readily accessible to the pilot in
flight.

8. Carriage of arms, ammunition, explosives, military stores, etc.:-

No person shall carry or cause or permit to be carried in any aircraft to, from,
within or over India, any arms, ammunitions, munitions of war, implements of war,
explosives and military stores, except with the written permission of the Central
Government and subject to the terms and conditions of such permission.

8A. Security check of persons boarding aircraft at aerodrome:—

For the purpose of securing the safety of aircraft operations, every person boarding
an aircraft at an aerodrome and his hand-baggage, if any, shall be liable to be searched
at the aerodrome, by an officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government,
before such person proceeds to the aircraft for embarkation.

9. Radio-telegraph Apparatus :—

No person shall operate radio transmitting apparatus in any aircraft registered
in India unless he holds a licence of the type required by the provisions of Part V in
respect of aircraft required by these rules to carry radio-telegraph or radio-telephone
apparatus, as the case may be, and issued in accordance with those provisions.

10. Mails:—

No person shall carry mails or allow mails to be carried in any aircraft except
with the consent in writing of the Director-General of Posts and Telegraphs.

11. Aerodromes:—

No pilot or person-in-charge of any aircraft carrying passengers for hire or reward
shall use any place for a series of landings and departures, and no pilot or person-in-
charge of any aircraft employed on a scheduled air transport service shall use any
place as a regular place of landing or departure other than an aerodrome licensed or
approved for the purpose in accordance with the provisions of Part XI.

12. Prohibited Areas:—

(1) No person shall fly or assist in flying an aircraft over any of the areas
specified in Schedule I save in accordance with the conditions specified in
that schedule.

(2) Every pilot who, when flying an aircraft, finds himself above a prohibited
area in contravention of sub-rule (1), shall, as soon as he is aware of the
fact, give the signal of distress and shall land the aircraft as soon as possible
outside the prohibited area at one of the nearest aerodromes in India :

Provided that he shall not, unless compelled by stress of weather or other
unavoidable cause, fly further into the prohibited area nor commence to

369

AIR REGULATIONS

descend while still above the prohibited area.

(3) When the signals to warn an aircraft that it is flying in the vicinity of
restricted, prohibited or danger area are given, the pilot of the aircraft shall
immediately change his course and fly away from the prohibited area.

(4) When the signals from aerodrome control tower are given, the pilot shall
immediately give the signal referred to in sub-rule (2) of this rule and land
the aircraft in accordance with that sub-rule.

Areas over which flight by aircraft is prohibited :
(See rule 12). Extent of Prohibition In all the areas specified is absolute.

(1) The area included within a radius of one mile from the Towers of Silence
on Malabar Hills, Bombay.

(2) The area near Baroda aerodrome extending vertically from ground level to
an unlimited upper level.

(3) The Area around Rashtrapati Bhavan extending vertically from ground
level to an unlimited upper level.

(4) The Area included within a radius of ten kilometers from Mathura
Refineries extending vertically from ground level to an unlimited upper
level.

(5) The Area near Bhubaneshwar extending vertically from ground level to
upper level of 50,000 feet.

(6) The Area included within a radius of ten kilometers from Kalpakkam
nuclear extending vertically from ground level upto an upper level of
10,000 feet.

13. Photograph at aerodromes or from aircraft in flight:—

No person shall take, or cause or permit to be taken, at a Government aerodrome
or from an aircraft in flight, any photograph except in accordance with and subject to
the terms and conditions of a permission in writing granted by the Director-General, a
Joint Director General, a Deputy Director-General or the Director of Regulations and
Information of the Civil Aviation Department :

14. Aerial work and public transport reserved for certain aircraft:—

No aircraft registered in accordance with Part IV in Category B shall be used as
an aerial work aircraft or as a public transport aircraft:

Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, permit and impose
restrictions on the performance of aerial work or public transport by aircraft other
than those registered in accordance with Part IV in Category A, and such restrictions
shall be deemed to have been effectively imposed if they have been notified in writing
to the owner or operator of such aircraft or by notification in the Official Gazette.

370

--- Page 192 ---

NATIONAL LAW

15. Conditions to be complied with by aircraft in flight :—

No aircraft shall be flown unless the following conditions are complied with,
namely:—

(i) the aircraft possesses a valid certificate of airworthiness or special certificate
of airworthiness issued by the Director-General]; ,

(ii) the aircraft shall be certified as airworthy and shall be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Part VI or in the case of an aircraft not
registered in India, in accordance with the regulations of the State in which
the aircraft is registered;

Gii) all the terms or conditions on which the certificate of airworthiness or
special certificate of airworthiness was granted shall be duly complied with;

(iv) the aircraft shall carry on board its certificate of airworthiness or special
certificate of airworthiness and any other certificate prescribed by Part VI,
or by the regulations of the State in which the aircraft is registered, which
it is required to carry on board:

Provided that an aircraft not in compliance with the aforesaid conditions may

be flown under a special flight permit issued by the Director-General under rule 55A
subject to such conditions as may be specified in the special flight permit.

15A. Operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft System.

No remotely piloted aircraft of all-upweight more than 250 grams shall be flown
unless such aircraft has been allotted a Unique Identification Number by the Director-
General.

A remotely piloted aircraft with all up weight exceeding a limit as specified by the
Director-General from time to time shall not be flown by the operator, save, as per the
conditions of the permit issued by the Director-General.

16. Rules of the Air:—

Every person shall comply with the Rules of the Air issued by the Director-
General in accordance with Annex 2 to the Convention as may be applicable to that
person.

17. Production of licences, etc. :-—

Any licence (other than a licence issued under Part XIID), certificate, authorisation
and approval, log book or document granted or required to be maintained under these
rules shall, on demand for the purpose of inspection, by any magistrate, any police
officer above the rank of sub-inspector, any Customs officer, any commissioned officer of
the Naval, Military or Air Force of the Union, any gazetted officer of the Civil Aviation
Department in Government of India or any other person authorised by the Central
Government by special or general order in writing in this behalf, be produced by the
licensee or, in the case of an aircraft or of a licensed aerodrome, by the owner, hirer or
person-in-charge thereof ;

371

AIR REGULATIONS

Provided that any such licence, certificate, authorisation and approval, log book
or document relating to an aircraft or its personnel which is not by these rules required
to be carried in the aircraft shall be produced within seven days of the making of the
demand.

18. Prevention of flights in contravention of the rules:—

An authority authorised under section 8 of the Aircraft Act, 1934, to detain
aircraft may do so by the issue of a written direction to the pilot or other persons
for the time being in-charge of the aircraft to be detained, or by taking or causing
to be taken such other steps as may, in the opinion of such authority, be necessary
to make the detention effective, including the use of force, denial of access by any
person to the aircraft, removal of parts and components of the aircraft, defuelling of
the aircraft or otherwise interfering with the aircraft. If an aircraft detained by a
person so authorized is housed or kept at a Government aerodrome, the housing or
picketing charges normally applicable shall be payable in respect of the whole period
during which it is detained.

19. Cancellation, suspension or endorsement of licences, certificates,
authorisation and approval :—

Where any person is convicted of a contravention of, or failure to comply with,
these rules or any direction issued under rule 183A in respect of any aircraft, the
Central Government may cancel or suspend any certificate of registration granted
under these rules relating to that aircraft.

The Central Government may cancel or suspend any certificate granted under
these rules relating to airworthiness of an aircraft or a Type Certificate of an aircraft
component, or item of equipment, if the Central Government is satisfied that a
reasonable doubt exists as to the -

(a) safety of the aircraft or the type of aircraft; or
(b) the airworthiness of the aircraft.
19A. Restrictions on licence, certificate, authorisation or approval.

The Director-General may impose restrictions, as deemed fit, on any licence,
certificate, authorisation or approval:

(a) in the event of non-compliance with any condition imposed on the said
licence, certificate, authorisation or approval;

(b) if any safety concern that emerged during an inspection has remained
unresolved beyond the period specified by the Director-General.

20. Certain rules not applicable to Gliders, Kites and Remotely Piloted

Aircraft System.

The rule 7 shall not apply to gliders, and rules 5, 6, 7, 12, 15, 17, 1v and the rules
in Part III, with the exception of rule 26, shall not apply to kites. The rules 5, 6, 15 in
Part I, ali rules in Part III with the exception of rules 21, 21A, 26 and all rules in Part
IV, Part V, Part VI and Part VII, shall not apply to remotely piloted aircraft system.

3872

--- Page 193 ---

NATIONAL LAW

21. Dangerous flying:—

No person shall fly any aircraft in such circumstances as, by reason of low altitude
or proximity to persons or dwellings or for other reason, to cause unnecessary danger
to any person or property. Refer rule 21A for General Ssafety and 21B for aircraft in
distress.

22. Assault and other acts of interference against a crew member :—
No person shall, on board an aircraft, —

a) assault, intimidate or threaten, whether physically or verbally, a crew
member which may interfere with the performance of the duties of the crew
member or lessens the ability of the crew member to perform those duties;

b) refuse to follow a lawful instruction given by the Pilot-in-Command, or
on behalf of the Pilot-in-Command by a crew member, for the purpose of
ensuring the safety of the aircraft or of any person or property on board or
for the purpose of maintaining good order and discipline on board.

23. Assault and other acts endangering safety or jeopardizing good order
and discipline:—

No person shall, on board an aircraft,—
(a) assault, intimidate or threaten, whether physically or verbally, any person,
(b) intentionally cause damage to or destroy any of property,

(c) .consume alcoholic beverages or drugs, which is likely to endanger the
safety of the aircraft or of any person or jeopardizes the good order and
discipline on board the aircraft.

24. Prohibition on consumption of intoxicating and psychoactive
substances:—

No person acting as, or carried in aircraft for the purpose of acting as pilot,
commander, navigator, engineer, cabin crew or other operating member of the crew
thereof, shall have taken or used any alcoholic drink, sedative, narcotic or stimulant
drug or preparation within twelve hours of the commencement of the flight or take
or use any such preparation in the course of the flight, and no such person shall,
while so acting or carried, be in a state of intoxication or have detectable blood alcohol
whatsoever in his breath, urine or blood alcohol analysis or in a state in which by reason
of his having taken any alcoholic, sedative, narcotic or stimulant drug or preparation,
his capacity so to act is impaired, and no other person while in a state of intoxication
shall enter or be in aircraft.

No operator operating a domestic air transport service in India shall serve any
alcoholic drink on board such an air transport service and no passenger traveling on
such a service shall consume any alcoholic drink while on board.

The holders of licences shall not exercise the privileges of their licences and

373

AIR REGULATIONS

related ratings while under the influence of any psychoactive substance which might
render them unable to safely and properly exercise the privileges of the licences and
ratings.

The holders of licences shall not engage in problematic use of substances.

24A. Carriage of persons suffering from mental disorders or epillepsy in
aircraft:—

No person shall knowingly carry or permit to be carried, or connive at the carriage
of, a person suffering from any mental disorder or epillepsy in any aircraft:

Provided that this prohibition shall not apply if the person to be carried is certified
by a registered medical practitioner to be fit to travel by air without being a risk to
other passengers or to the aircraft, and in addition :-

(a) has not taken or used any alcoholic drink or preparation within twelve
hours of the commencement of the flight;

(b) is kept under proper sedative, if in a state of excitement, during the flight
and stops en route; and

(c) is accompanied by an attendant, provided that in case he has been in a state
of excitement requiring sedation within the two weeks preceding the date of
commencement of the flight, he shall be accompanied by a registered medical
practitioner and adequate escort who shall individually and collectively be
responsible for ensuring that no alcoholic drink or preparation is taken by
the person in their charge and that such person is kept suitably sedated
during the flight and stops en route.

24B. Carriage of prisoners in aircraft:—

No prisoner shall be taken aboard or carried on an aircraft except under and in
accordance with a permit in writing issued by the Director-General, a Deputy Director-
General, the Director of Regulations and Information or any other officer of the Civil
Aviation Department authorized by the Central Government in this behalf and subject
to such conditions, if any, as he may specify in the permit.

Explanation :— The term “prisoner” means a person who is confined in any prison and
includes a person who is arrested under any law for the time being in force.

24C. Carriage of animals, birds and reptiles in aircraft:—

No animal, bird or reptile shall be taken aboard or carried on any aircraft to, from
and within India, except under and in accordance with a general or special permit in
writing issued by the Director-General in this behalf, and subject to such conditions, if
any, as may be specified therein.

25. Smoking in aircraft:—

(1) The owner or the operator and the pilot-in-command of every aircraft
registered in India, shall exhibit or cause to be exhibited in prominent
place(s) in the aircraft notice(s) stating where and to what extent smoking

374

--- Page 194 ---

(2)

NATIONAL LAW

is prohibited or permitted therein.

A notice permitting smoking in such aircraft may be exhibited therein only
if smoking in the aircraft is permitted by the certificate of airworthiness
of the aircraft or by the direction of the Central Government and only
in accordance with the conditions relating to smoking contained in such
certificate or direction.

25A. Fuelling of aircraft:—

(1)

(2)

No person shali fill or replenish the fuel tanks of an aircraft from vehicles
or vessels containing petroleum in bulk or from fuel hydrant installations
except from vehicles or installations of a type approved by the Chief Inspector
of Explosives or from barges licensed under the Petroleum Rules, 2002.

During fuelling operations, which may include filling or draining of fuel
tanks, the following precautions shall be observed :-

(a) Fuelling of aircraft shall be done outdoors and not less than 15 meters
from any building.

(tb) A“NO SMOKING?” notice shall be prominently displayed.

(c) Smoking or use of an appliance employing naked flame or use of an
appliance capable of producing a spark or in any other way igniting
fuel vapours shall not be permitted within 30 meters of the aircraft or
fuelling equipment.

(d) Aircraft engines shall not be started or turned and ignition switches
shall be placed in the “OFF” position.

(e) Aircraft electrical radar and radio systems shall not be operated and
the switches relating thereto shall remain in the “OFF” position:

Provided that this clause shall not apply to electrical switches controlling the
following circuits :

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

power and light essential for fuelling operations;

minimum amount of cabin lighting; and

steady parking lights. Such switches shall not be operated during the

fuelling operations.

(f) The use of ground power supply units, air-conditioning units, tractors
and similar equipment shall be permissible subject to compliance with
the following conditions:-

@ ‘Flexible training cables suitable for use in hazardous areas shall
be used.

(ii) They shall be located outside the Danger Zone. “Danger Zone”
is defined as the area within the largest polygon obtainable by

joining points 3 meters away from the wings and the fuelling
vehicle. This rule shall not apply to the use of ground batteries

375

(g)
(h)

@)

i)

(k)
@)

(m)

AIR REGULATIONS

as an auxiliary source of electric supply to the aircraft provided
they are not connected or disconnected during fuelling operation.

(iii) The units, including the associated electrical equipment, shall
be flame-proof and of a type approved by the Chief Inspector of
Explosives, otherwise they shall be stationed at a distance of not
less than 15 meters, in the case of gasoline or wide out fuels and
6 meters in the case of straight kerosene, from the aircraft and
the fuelling vehicle.

(iv) They shall not be switched “ON” or “OFF” during fuel transfer.

The fuelling equipment and the aircraft shall be bonded to each other
and both shall be earthed.

No person other than the staff of the operator, fuelling company and
officials of the Civil Aviation Department, Customs and Police, shall be
permitted within 15 meters of the aircraft.

Passengers may be permitted to embark, disembark, or remain in the
cabin subject to the following conditions :-

(i) an attendant shall remain on duty in the cabin of the aircraft.
The attendant shall ensure that no smoking takes place or other
source of ignition is allowed to occur and shall assist in the
removal of passengers in the event of fire;

(ii) the passenger loading ramp shall be correctly positioned at the
cabin exit door and adequate provision shall be made to maintain
the equilibrium of the aircraft in case all passengers attempt to
leave by one exit;

Gii) in case of marine aircraft, adequate means of water transport
shall be stationed at cabin exit door.

The handling of freight and baggage in and around the aircraft shall
not proceed simultaneously with fuelling unless adequate precautions
have been taken to eliminate fire risk.

No aircraft maintenance shall be conducted which may provide a
source of ignition for fuel vapour during fuelling operations.

Fire extinguishers of adequate capacity and of suitable type, approved
by the Director-General shall be available for immediate use near the
aircraft.

In the event of fuel being spilled, fuelling must cease and the engine
of the ground power supply units must be stopped, but the electrical
circuits and switches should on no account be touched except for the
purpose of stopping the power unit. Prior to recommencing fuelling,
action must be taken to clean the spilled fuel. Fuel must not be washed
into sewers or drains.

376

--- Page 195 ---

NATIONAL LAW

(n) Fuelling operations shall cease when a turbo-jet aircraft manouvres
so as to bring the rear jet outlets within 43 meters of the fuelling
equipment or the aircraft.

25B. Housing of aircraft:—

(1) No aircraft containing dangerous petroleum in bulk in any of its tanks may
be housed in a hanger unless such hangar is constructed of uninflammable
material and is effectively and safely ventilated to the open air.

(2) Every such hangar shall be in charge of a competent person who shall be
responsible for taking all proper precautions against fire and shall prevent
unauthorized persons from having access to the building.

26. Dropping of articles and descent by parachutes:—

(1) No person shall drop or project or cause or permit to be dropped or projected
from an aircraft in motion anything except ballast in the form of fine sand
or water:

Provided that nothing in this rule shall be construed as preventing -
(a) in an emergency, the dropping of liquid fuel;

(b) in an emergency, the dropping of cargo over areas where hazard to
persons or property outside the aircraft is not thereby created;

(c) the dropping of message bags, smoke producing or other apparatus
or materials dropped for the purpose of navigating an aircraft or
communicating messages from an aircraft subject to the observance of
such precautions as to the nature of the articles dropped and the place
of dropping as will avoid risk of injuring persons or damaging property
on the ground or water;

(d) the dropping of separate sheets of paper containing printed matter or
separate petals of flowers in any place if :-
i. the prior written permission of the District Magistrate or the
Commissioner of Police is obtained in each case;
ii. the aircraft is suitable for dropping these articles;

iii, the minimum safe heights specified in these rules are observed;
and

iv. necessary precautions are taken to avoid injury or damage to
persons or property.

(e) the dropping of ropes used for towing aircraft.

(2) No person shall, except in an emergency, descend by means of a parachute
from an aircraft and no person shall drop or cause or permit to be dropped
from an aircraft in flight any article, whether attached to a parachute or
not, unless the descent is made or the article is dropped in accordance with
the subject to any conditions or limitations contained in general or special

377

AIR REGULATIONS

order of the Central Government in writing in that behalf.
27. Carriage of persons in unauthorised parts of aircraft:—

No person shall at any time be carried on the wings or undercarriage of the
aircraft, or on or in any other part thereof which is not designed for the accommodation
of the personnel or passengers, or on or in anything attached externally to the aircraft:

Provided that -

(a) nothing in this rule shall prevent a person having temporary access -

(i) to any part of the aircraft for the purpose of executing repairs to the
aircraft or adjusting the machinery, or equipment thereof or for the
purpose of doing anything which may be necessary for the safety of the
aircraft or persons or goods carried therein; or

(ii) to any part of the aircraft in which goods or stores are being carried
and to which proper means of access is provided; and

(b) a person may be carried on or in any part of the aircraft, or anything
attached thereto, with the permission in writing of the Central Government
and subject to any conditions which may be specified in such permission.

28. Minimum age for sole control of aircraft:—

No person being under 16 years of age shall have sole control of an aircraft in
motion and no person shall cause or permit any other person to have sole control of
an aircraft in motion unless he knows or has reasonable cause to believe such other
person to have attained the age of 16 years.

28A. Maximum age limit for professional pilots:—

(1) No person, holding a pilot’s licence issued under these rules and having
attained the age of sixty-five years, shall act as Pilot-in-Command or Co-
pilot of an aircraft engaged in commercial air transport operations.

(2) No person holding a pilot’s licence issued under these rules and having

attained the age of sixty years , shall act as Pilot-in-Command or Co-pilot
of an arcraft engaged in commercial air transport operations unless it is
operated in a multi-crew environment and the other pilot is less than sixty
years of age.
Provided that the provisions of sub-rule (2) shall not apply in respect of
aircraft certified for single pilot operations and not exceeding an all up weight
of 5700 kilograms engaged in commercial air transport operations within
the territory of India and while operating in a multi-crew environment.

29. Acts likely to imperil the safety of aircraft:—

No person shall interfere with the pilot or with a member of the operating crew
of an aircraft, or tamper with the aircraft or its equipment or conduct himself in a
disorderly manner in an aircraft or commit any act likely to imperil the safety of an
aircraft or its passengers or crew.

878

--- Page 196 ---

NATIONAL LAW

29A. Prohibition of operating civil aircraft causing sonic boom:—

No person shall operate a civil aircraft at a true flight mach number greater than
one over the territory of India or over the high seas in a manner which may cause or is
likely to cause sonic boom over the territory of India.
29B. Prohibition on the use of portable electronic devices:—

No person shall operate, nor shall the operator or the pilot-in-command of an
aircraft allow the operation of any portable electronic device on board an aircraft in

flight:

Provided that the Pilot-in-Command may permit the use of cellular telephone
by the passengers of a flight after the aircraft has landed and cleared active runway,
except when the landing takes place in low visibility conditions as may be determined
by the Director-General from time to time.

The provisions of this rule shall not apply to portable voice recorders, hearing
aids, heart pacemaker, electric shavers or other portable electronic devices.

Provided further that the Pilot-in-Command may permit the use of mobile
communication and internet services through Wi-Fi on board an aircraft certified by
the Director-General for such services and subject to the procedures specified by the
Director-General-in that behalf.
29C. Adoption of the Convention and Annexes:—

(1) The Director-General may lay down standards and procedures not
inconsistent with the Aircraft Act, 1984 (22 of 1934) and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the Convention and any Annex thereto.

(2) The Director-General shall formulate the State Safety Programme and
oversee its implementation.

29D. Safety Management Systems:—

Every organisation engaged in the operation of aircraft and aerodromes, provision
of air traffic services, training of personnel, maintenance, design and manufacture of
aeronautical products shall, ~—

(a) establish and maintain Safety Management Systems; and

(b) prepare a Safety Management Systems Manual in such form and manner
as may be specified by the Director-General and submit the same to the
Director-General for approval. _

30. Certificate of Registration:—

An aircraft may be registered in India in either of the following categories,
namely:

(a) Category A — Where the aircraft is wholly owned either —
(i) _ by citizens of India; or ;
(ii) by a company or corporation registered and having its principal place

379

AIR REGULATIONS

of business within India; or

(iii) by the Central Government or any State Government or any company or
any corporation owned or controlled by either of the said Governments;
or

(iv) by a company or corporation registered elsewhere than in India,
provided that such company or corporation has given the said aircraft
on lease to any person mentioned in sub-clause (i), sub-clause (ii) or
sub-clause (iii); and

(b) Category B— Where the aircraft is wholly owned either —

Gi) _ by persons resident in or carrying on business in India, who are not
citizens of India; or

(ii) by a company or corporation registered elsewhere than in India and
carrying on business in India.

The registration of an aircraft registered in India may be cancelled at any time by
the Central Government, if it is satisfied that —

@ __ such registration is not in conformity with the provisions of categories
A and B above; or

Gi) the registration has been obtained by furnishing false information; or

Gii) the aircraft could more suitably be registered in some other country; or

(iv) the lease in respect of the aircraft, registered in pursuance of sub-
clause (iv) of clause (a) of sub-rule (2), is not in force; or

(v) the certificate of airworthiness in respect of the aircraft has expired for
a period of five years or more; or

(vi) the aircraft has been destroyed or permanently withdrawn from use;
or

(vii) it is inexpedient in the public interest that the aircraft should remain
registered in India.

The registration of an aircraft registered in India, to which the provisions of the
Cape Town Convention and Cape Town Protocol apply, shall be cancelled by the Central
Government, within five working days, without seeking consent or any document from
the operator of the aircraft or any other person.

33. Change in ownership:—

In the event of any change in the ownership of a registered aircraft, or if a
registered aircraft ceases to be owned wholly either by a person or by a company or
corporation fulfilling the conditions set out in rule 30, then -

(a) the registered owner of the aircraft shall forthwith notify to the Director-
General such change of ownership or, as the case may be, that the aircraft
has ceased to be so owned;

380

--- Page 197 ---

NATIONAL LAW

(b) any person, company or corporation who becomes the owner of an aircraft
registered in India (hereinafter referred to as the New Owner) shall
forthwith inform the Director-General in writing of the fact of his ownership
of the aircraft and may make an application for a certificate of registration;

(c) the registration and the certificate there-of shall remain valid until such
registration and certificate have been cancelled by the Director-General.

387A. Use of State Marks:—

(1) Anaircraft shall not bear on any part of its exterior surface any advertisement
or any sign or lettering except those under these rules and as required or
permitted by the Director-General.

(2) The name of an aircraft and the name and emblems of the owner of the
aircraft may be displayed on the aircraft if the location, size, shape and
colour of the lettering and signs do not interfere with easy recognition of,
and are not capable of confusion with, the nationality and registration
marks of the aircraft.

(3) An aircraft other than a State aircraft shall not bear any mark or sign
prescribed for use by a State aircraft.

(4) National flags or colours may be displayed on the aircraft in such a manner
that they are distinct and are not likely to create confusion with the markings
used by military aircraft.

38. Licensing Authority:—

The authority by which the licences and ratings specified may be granted, renewed
or varied shall be the Central Government, which may withhold the grant or renewal
of a licence or a rating, if for any reason it considers it desirable to do so.
88A. Carriage of operating crew:—

Subject to the provisions of rules 6, 6A and 6B, every aircraft resigtered in India
shall comply with such of the following requirements in respect of the personnel which
it carries and by which it is operated as are applicable to the aircraft and type of
operation concerned, namely :-

(1) Pilot

(a) Private Aircraft — Every private aircraft shall be flown by a person
holding a valid pilot’s licence issued in accordance with Schedule II:
Provided that:
(i) aprivate aircraft shall not be flown by a person holding a Student
Pilot’s Licence;

(ii) a private aircraft shall not be flown by a person holding a Private
Pilot’s Licence for remuneration or hire of any kind;

(iii) a private aircraft carrying passengers at night, shall not be flown
by a person holding a Private Pilot’s Licence, without having a

381

AIR REGULATIONS

valid Instrument Rating.

(b) Public transport and Aerial Work Aircraft — Every Public transport or
aerial work aircraft (other than a microlight or a glider or a balloon)
shall be flown by a person holding an appropriate professional pilot’s
licence, i.e. a Commercial or Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence issued in
accordance with Schedule II:

(2) Flight Instructor or Assistant Flight Instructor —

(a) Every aircraft which is being used for the purpose of giving dual
instructions in piloting shall carry a person holding an appropriate
professional pilot’s licence, that is, a Commercial or Airline Transport
Pilot’s Licence or Pilot’s Licence (Microlight, Gliders and Balloons)
as the case may be, which has an appropriate Flight Instructor's or
Assistant Flight Instructor’s rating in accordance with Schedule II, or
an authorization issued in writing by the Director-General.

(b) No person other than a person having a Flight Instructor’s or Assistant
Flight Instructor’s rating shall impart instructions in piloting an
aircraft, unless he has been specifically authorized in writing by the
Director-General to impart such instructions.

(3) Flight Navigator:—

Every public transport aircraft engaged on a flight without landing over a great
circle distance of more than six hundred NMs and not equipped with the navigational
equipment capable of providing instant and continuous ground position of the aircraft
with adequate stand-by arrangements, shall carry on board a Flight Navigator licenced
in accordance with Schedule II, if the total distance between any two consecutive radio
navigational fixing aids located within thirty NMs of the route of the proposed flight
and capable of being used by the aircraft is more than six hundred NMs:

Provided that the Director-General may require a Flight Navigator to be carried
on board an aircraft on any flight.

(4) Flight Engineer - Where a Flight Engineer is required to be carried on board
an aircraft as flight crew member under sub-rule (7), he shall be a person
holding the appropriate licence in accordance with Schedule II. (5)
Deleted

(6) Flight Radio Telephone Operator — An aircraft which is equipped or required
to be equipped with radio apparatus in accordance with rule 63 and which
communicates by radio telephony, shall carry a person holding a Flight
Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence or Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s
Licence (Restricted), as the case may be, issued in accordance with Schedule
II, to operate radio apparatus on such aircraft.

(7) Minimum crew for any flight - The number and description of the flight
crew members operating any flight of an aircraft registered in India shall
be as per the certificate of airworthiness.

382

--- Page 198 ---

NATIONAL LAW

38B. Carriage of Cabin Crew:—

No aircraft registered in India shall be operated for public transport of passengers
unless the following minimum number of cabin crew are on board the aircraft for the
purpose of performing such duties as may be assigned in the interest of the safety of
passengers, by the operator or the Pilot-in-command of the aircraft, namely:-

G) For an aeroplane having a seating One cabin crew
capacity of not less than 10 and
not more than 50 passengers.

(ii) For a helicopter having a seating One cabine crew
capacity of not less than 20 and
not more than 50 passengers.

Gii) For an aeroplane or a helicopter Two cabine crew plus one cabin
having a seating capacity of more. crew for each unit (or part of a
than 50 passengers. unit) of 50 passangers seats

above a seating capacity
of 99 passengers.

389A. Disqualification from holding or obtaining a licence :-

(1) Where the licensing authority is satisfied, after giving him an opportunity
of being heard, that any person —
(a) is habitually intemperate in the use of alcohol, or is an addict of
narcotics, drugs and the like, or

(b) is using, has used or is about to use an aircraft in the commission of a
cognizable offence or in contravention of these rules, or

(c) has, by his previous conduct as member of the crew of an aircraft,
shown that he is irresponsible in the discharge of his duties connected
with his employment or is likely to endanger the safety of the aircraft
or any person or thing carried therein, or of other aircraft or persons or
things on the ground, or

, (a) is a habitual criminal or has been convicted by a Court in India for
an offence involving moral turpitude or an offence which amounts to
heinous crime, or

(e) has obtained the licence, rating, aircraft type rating or extension
of aircraft type rating, or renewal of any of them, by suppression of
material information or on the basis of wrong information, or

(f) has unauthorisedly varied or tampered with the particulars entered
in a licence or rating, the licensing authority may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, make an order disqualifying that person fora
specified period from holding or obtaining a licence.

383

AIR REGULATIONS

(2) The Central Government may debar a person permanently or temporarily
from holding any licence or rating mentioned in rule 38 if in its opinion it is
necessary to do so in the public interest.

39B. Medical standards:—

No licence or rating referred to in rule 38, required for any of the personnel of
the aircraft, shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant undergoes a medical
examination with an approved medical authority and satisfies the medical standards
as notified by the Director-General.

40. Signature of Licence Holder:—

On the issue of a licence to an applicant he shall forthwith sign his name on the
licence as the holder thereof with his ordinary signature.

41. Proof of competency:—

Applicants for licences and ratings shall produce proof of having acquired
the flying experience and having passed satisfactorily the test and examinations
specified in Schedule II in respect of the licence or rating concerned :

Provided that a person who is a qualified pilot from the Indian Air Force, Indian
Navy, Indian Army or Indian Coast Guard and who produces satisfactory evidence to
show that he possesses the necessary flying experience, competency and standards
of physical fitness as required under these rules may be exempted by the Director-
General, by general or special order in writing, and subject to such conditions, if any,
as may be specified in such order, from all or any of the flying tests and from medical
or other technical examinations required for the issue of the licences under these rules.

41A. Checks, Tests and Examinations:—

The Director-General may conduct examinations specified in Schedule II, may fix
examination centres within India, appoint invigilators and lay down the procedure for
conducting the examinations.

The Director-General may appoint Examiners for carrying out flying tests and
technical examinations required under Schedule II and may also appoint a Board to
conduct oral examinations when necessary.

42. Licences and their renewal :—

(1) The licences and ratings mentioned in Rule 38 may be issued or renewed for
any period not exceeding the period specified in rule 89C and Schedule II in
respect of each licence or rating:

Provided that if, on the date of application for renewal, the licence or rating has
expired for the periods specified below, the applicant may be required to qualify in
the examinations and skill tests specified against them and such other examinations
and tests as the Director-General may consider necessary to assess the applicant’s
competency to hold that licence or rating :-

384

--- Page 199 ---

NATIONAL LAW

(a) Fora period exceeding 2 years but not exceeding 3 years. Test of skill
and Air Regulations.

(b) For a period exceeding 3 years. All examinations and tests required
for the issue of the licence or rating.

(2) The holder of a licence shall not exercise the privileges of his licence without
being declared fit after a fresh medical examination in the event of his
having-

(a) a sickness or injury involving incapacity for a period of fifteen days or
more for the work for which he is licensed; or

(b) an injury sustained in any accident occurring during the exercise of
the privileges of his licence or otherwise and which is likely to cause
incapacity or impair his efficiency in the discharge of his duties.

The licence holder or his employer shall immediately notify all the relevant
details of the sickness or injury to the Director-General.

44, Aircraft not registered in India:—

An aircraft not registered in India shall carry the personnel prescribed by the
laws of the State in which it is registered and such personnel shall be licenced in
accordance with the laws of that State.

45. Validation of Foreign Licences:—

When a licence has been granted by the duly competent authority in any foreign
State and is for the time being in force, the Central Government may, subject to
such conditions and limitations and for such periods as it shall think fit, render such
licence valid by an authorisation for flying aircraft registered in India and a licence so
validated shall be subject to the provisions of rule 19 and such validation of a licence
shall cease if the licence is revoked or suspended.

50. Certificate of airworthiness:—

The owner or operator of an aircraft may apply to the Director-General for the
issue or renewal of a certificate of airworthiness or a special certificate of airworthiness
in respect of the aircraft or for the validation of a certificate of airworthiness issued
elsewhere in respect of the aircraft.

The Director-General may validate a certificate of airworthiness in respect of any
aircraft that may be imported.

Subject to these rules, a certificate of airworthiness shall remain in force for such
period as may be specified in the certificate and may from time to time be renewed by
the Director-General. :

385

AIR REGULATIONS

52. Modification and repairs:—

(1) A person shall not carry out any modification or repair affecting safety of
any aircraft in respect of which there is a valid certificate of airworthiness
unless he has been required to do so in pursuance of these rules or unless he
has obtained the prior approval of the Director-General.

(2) (a) Modifications issued by the manufacturer of an aircraft, aircraft
component or item of equipment of that aircraft which have been issued
a Type Certificate by the Director-General or elsewhere may be deemed
as approved modifications, unless otherwise specified by the Director
General.

(b) Repair schemes issued by the manufacturer of an aircraft, aircraft
component or item of equipment of that aircraft issued with a Type
Certificate by the Director-General or elsewhere and other repairs
carried out in accordance with standard aeronautical engineering
practice may be deemed as approved unless otherwise specified by the
Director-General.

55. Suspension or cancellation of Certificate of Airworthiness and its
continued validity:— See chapter 16

65. Aeronautical beacon and aeronautical ground lights:—

(1) No aeronautical beacon or aeronautical ground light shall be established
or maintained within India nor shall the character of the light exhibited
there from be altered except with the approval in writing of the Central
Government and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

(2) No person shall willfully or negligently endanger or interfere with any
aeronautical beacon or aeronautical ground light established or maintained
by or with the approval of the Central Government or any light exhibited
therefrom.

67A. Log Books of Flight Crew Personnel and logging of flight time:—
(1) Every member of the Flight Crew licensed under these rules shall maintain

a personal log book, in the form prescribed by the Director-General and all
flight times shall be logged therein.

(2) All entries in log books shall be made in ink.

(3) Log Books shall be preserved for not less than 5 years after the date of the
last entry therein.

(4) Every member of the Flight Crew shall certify the accuracy of the entries in
his log book with respect to flight time at least at the end of each calendar
month. The pilot-in-command during dual instruction shall certify entries
with respect to flight time during such dual instruction. At the end of
every quarter in a year, that is, at the end of March, June, September and
December, log books shall be certified for correctness of entries therein —

386

--- Page 200 ---

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

NATIONAL LAW

(a) by competent authorities, such as, the Operations Manager, Deputy
Operations Manager, or Chief Pilot of the Air Transport Undertaking
concerned, in the case of professional pilots,

(b) by the Chief Flying Instructor, in the case of members of the Flying
Training Organisation, and

(©) _ by Officers designated by Director-General of Civil Aviation in the case
of all other persons;

Flight time during which a pilot is under dual instruction shall be entered
in his log book as “dual” and the pilot giving instruction shall make entries
in the log book of the pilot under instruction showing the nature of the
instruction given.

Flight time spent in performing, under supervision of a pilot-in-command,
the duties and functions of a pilot-in-command may be logged as pilot-in-
command provided the person is entitled and authorized to fly in command
of that type of aeroplane by virtue of the ratings and privileges of his pilot’s
licence. In all other cases, such flight time shall be logged as co-pilot with
appropriate indication in the remarks column.

The holder of a Student Pilot’s Licence may log as pilot-in-command only
that portion of the flight time during which he is the sole occupant of an
aircraft provided that, in the case of an aircraft which requires more than
one pilot in accordance with sub (7) of rule 38A and rule 6B, he may log as
pilot-in-command that portion of the flight time during which he acts as
pilots-in-command of the aircraft.

The holder of a Private Pilot’s Licence may log as pilot-in-command only the
flight time during which he acts as pilot-in-command.

The holder of a Commercial or Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence may log as
pilot-in-command the flight time during which he acts as pilot-in-command.
He shall log as co-pilot the flight time during which he acts as co-pilot.

A Flight Instructor may log as pilot-in-command the flight time during
which he acts as an Instructor but the log entries shall indicate in the
remarks column that the flight time was flown as an Instructor.

Instrument flight time may be logged by the pilot manipulating the controls
of an aircraft in flight only when the aircraft is flown solely by reference to
instruments, either under actual or simulated instrument flight conditions.
Over-the-top flying shall not be logged as instrument flying time.

Instrument ground time may be logged in full by the pilot while flying

solely by reference to instruments, in any recognized synthetic device which
simulates instrument flight conditions.

A pilot who acts as Examiner may log as pilot-in-command the flight
time during which he so acts, provided he is entitled and authorized to
fly in command of that type of flying machine by virtue of the ratings and

387

(14)

(15)

(16)

AIR REGULATIONS

privileges of his pilot’s licence.

A Flight Navigator shall log the flight time as a Flight Navigator during
which he is engaged in actual navigational duties. Flight time during which
a Flight Navigator performs actual navigational duties under supervision of
a licensed Flight Navigator shall be logged as a Flight Navigator with the
indication “under supervision” in the remarks column.

A Flight Engineer shall log the flight time as a Flight Engineer during
which he is engaged in actual Flight Engineer’s duties. Flight time during
which a Flight Engineer performs a actual Flight Engineer’s duties under
supervision of a licensed Flight Engineer shall be logged as a Flight Engineer
with indication “under supervision” in the remarks column.

A Flight Radio Telephone Operator shall log the flight time during which he
actually performs the duties of a Flight Radio Telephone Operator.

67B. No person shall destroy, mutilate, alter or render illegible any entry made, or
wilfully make or procure or assist in the making of any false or fraudulent entry in or
omission from any log book referred to in rules 67 and 67A.

79. Qualifications of Licensee:—

A licence for an aerodrome shall not be granted to any person other than —

(a)
(b)

a citizen of India; or
a Company or a body corporate:

Provided that —

(c)

(ad)

(i) it is registered and having its principal place of business in India;

(ii) it meets the equity holding criteria specified by the Central Government
from time to time; or

the Central Government or a State Government or any company or any
corporation owned or controlled by either of the said Governments; or

a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. (21 of 1860).

80. Procedure for Grant of Licence:—

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

An application for the grant of licence for an aerodrome shall be made to the
Director- General along with the Aerodrome Manual.

The application under sub-rule (1) shall be in such form and contain such
particulars as may be specified by the Director-General.

The Director-General may, for disposal of the application, require the
applicant to furnish any additional information which he considers necessary

The Director-General may also require the applicant to produce evidence in
support of any information furnished in the application.

388

--- Page 201 ---

NATIONAL LAW

133A.Directions by Director-General:—

(1) The Director-General may, through Notices to Airmen (NOTAMS),
Aeronautical Information Publication, Aeronautical Information Circulars
(AICs), Notices to Aircraft Owners and Maintenance Engineers and
publication entitled Civil Aviation Requirements, issue special directions
not inconsistent with the Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934) or these rules,
relating to the operation, use, possession, maintenance or navigation of
aircraft flying in or over India or of aircraft registered in India.

(2) The Civil Aviation Requirements under sub-rule(1) shall be issued after
placing the draft on the website of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation
for a period of thirty days for inviting objections and suggestions from all
persons likely to be affected thereby;

134. Scheduled Air Transport Services:—

No person shall operate any Scheduled air transport service from, to, in, or across
India except with the permission of the Central Government, granted under and in
accordance with and subject to the provisions contained in Schedule XI.

The Central Government may permit any air transport undertaking of which
the principal place of business is in any country outside India to operate a scheduled
air transport service from, to, or across India in accordance with the terms of any
agreement for the time being in force between the Government of India and the
Government of that country, or, where there is no such agreement, of a temporary
authorization by the Government of India.

140. Minimum requirements to be complied with by the operators:—

All aircraft owners and operators shall comply with the engineering, inspection
and manual requirements contained in Part XTII-A and with the safety requirements in
respect of air routes, aircraft and aircrew, as may be specified by the Director-General.

140A.Director-General’s sanction to introduction of any new routes or
alteration in any existing routes of scheduled air transport services:—

Before operating a scheduled air transport service on a new route or making a
substantial alteration in, or effecting the discontinuance of, any of the existing routes
of such services, or introducing a new time-table for such service, the Corporation shall
obtain the concurrence of the Director-General, in so far as such operation or, as the
case may be, such discontinuance affects, or is likely to affect, the air route or aerodrome
facilities, and give at least seven days’ previous notice to the Director-General before
the date proposed for the operation of the new route, or for the substantial alteration
of an existing route or for the introduction of a new time-table or, as the case may be,
for the discontinuance of an existing route.

389

AIR REGULATIONS

140B. Operations Manual:—

(1) An Operations Manual in the form approved by the Director-General, shall
be maintained by the Corporation.

(2) The Operations Manual shall, in addition to any other relevant information,
contain the following that is to say :-

(a) instructions outlining the responsibilities of operations personnel
pertaining to the conduct of flight operations,

(b) the flight crew for each stage of all routes to be flown including the
designation of the succession of command,

(c) in-flight procedure,

(d) emergency flight procedure,

(e) the minimum safe flight altitude for each route to be flown,

(f) the circumstances in which a radio listening watch is to be maintained,
(g) a list of the navigational equipments to be carried.

(3) A copy of the Operations Manual, or such part of the Manual as may be
prescribed by the Director-General, shall be carried in all aircraft engaged
in scheduled air transport services.

140C. Route Guide:-—

All aircraft of the Corporation engaged in scheduled air transport services shall
carry a Route Guide, which shall, in addition to any other relevant information, contain
the following that is to say:-

(a) communication facilities, navigation aids and a list of aerodromes,
available on the route to be flown,

(b) instrument ‘let down’ procedure for aerodromes on the route, or those
likely to be used as ‘alternates’,

(c) meteorological minima for each of the aerodromes on the route to be
flown and that are likely to be used as regular or alternate aerodromes,
and

(d) specific instructions for computation of the quantities of fuel and oil
to be carried on each route, having regard to all circumstances of the
operation, including the possibility of the failure of one or more engines
of the aircraft.

161. Penalties:—

(1) Any person who has contravened or failed to comply with any of these rules
or any direction issued under rule 133A shall, where no ,unishment is
provided for such contravention in the Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934), be
punishable to the extent laid down in Schedule VI of these rules.

890

--- Page 202 ---

NATIONAL LAW «. AIR REGULATIONS

(2) It shall be a defence to any proceedings for contravention of or failure to THE INDIAN AIRCRAFT RULES, 1920
comply with these rules if the contravention or failure is proved to have been
due to accident, stress of weather or other unavoidable cause; and it shall 53. Customs Aerodromes and Customs Officers:—

be a defence to any proceedings under these rules against the owner, hirer, The Central Government may for the purposes of this part,
operator, pilot or commander of an aircraft that the alleged contravention

took place without his actual fault or privity. (a) by notification in the Official Gazette declare any aerodrome in India

to be a customs aerodrome, and

(b) appoint persons to be Chief Customs Officers and Customs Collectors,
and define the areas within which each such person shall exercise
the powers and perform the duties conferred and imposed upon him
hereunder.

54. Arrival and departure:—

(1) Noperson incharge of an aircraft entering India shall cause it to be landed in
India for the first time in any journey except at a customs aerodrome, unless
the aircraft is compelled to land before arriving at a customs aerodrome by
accident, stress of weather or other unavoidable cause.

(2) No person in-charge of an aircraft shall fly the same or allow it to be flown
to a place outside India save from a customs aerodrome unless compelled to
land after departure from customs aerodrome by accident, stress of weather
or other unavoidable cause.

55. Import and export of goods:—

(1) No person in any aircraft entering or departing from India shall carry or
allow to be carried in the aircraft any goods of which the import or export by
sea or by land is prohibited by or under any law for the time being in force.

(2) No person in any aircraft entering India shall break or alter any seal placed
upon any part of the aircraft or upon any goods therein by an officer of
customs at the aerodrome at which such aircraft departed for India.

62. Examination:—

(1) The person in-charge or any -aircraft shall permit any Customs Collector or
other officer authorized in this behalf by the Customs Collector at any time
to board and examine the aircraft and any ;goods laden thereon.

(2) The importer or exporter of any goods shall produce such goods to the
Customs Collector at the customs aerodrome of importation or exportation,
as the case may be” and permit him to examine such goods.

391 892

--- Page 203 ---

NATIONAL LAW

AIRCRAFT MANUAL (INDIA) VOL I

This manual contains act and rules. An act is an act of parliament and the rules
are rules made by the Government of India under the act. Following act/rules govern
civil aviation activity in India:

The Aircraft Act,1934. An act for the control of manufacture, possession, use,
operation, sale, import and export of aircraft.

The Aircraft Rules, 1937. Rules made under the Act for regulating Civil Aviation
activity in India. For details see Vol II,Air Regulations.

The Indian Aircraft Rules, 1920. These are custom rules governing aircraft
arriving in or departing from India.

AIRCRAFTMANUAL (INDIA) VOL II
Part I of the manual contains National Conventions/Rules/Acts.

Part II contains International Conventions.

393

AIR REGULATIONS

THE AIRCRAFT (PUBLIC HEALTH RULES), 1954
Rules made to protect public health. The salient features of the rules are:

¢ The Commander of an aircraft on way to India shall inform the health officer at
destination atleast 2 hrs in advance on R/T details of any person suffering from
any sickness, quaranatinable or infectious disease.

* Incubation period for infectious diseases is:
5 Days- Influenzal Pneumonia, Cholera
6 Days- Yellow fever, plague
7 Days- Diphtheria
8 Days- Relapsing fever
10 Days- Cerebrospinal Meningitis
14 Days- Small pox, Chicken Pox, Typhus

¢ Dead bodies/human remains of persons who have died with diseases which cannot
be brought into India:

Yellow fever, Plague, Anthrax, Glanders
(However ashes of properly cremated bodies/remains can be brought).

Dead bodies/remains of persons who have died of any other reason can be brought
provided they are properly enclosed in suitable coffin and other procedures are followed.

The Aircraft (Demolition of Obstructions caused by Building and Trees
etc) Rules, 1994.

Procedure for demolition of obstructions around aerodromes are outlined in these
rules.

The Aircraft (Carriage of Dangerous Goods) Rules, 2003.

Procedures for carriage of dangerous goods are outlined in these rules.

Aircraft (Security) Rules 2011.
Deals with airport security.

Aircraft (Investigation of Accidents and Incidents) Rules 2017.
Deals with accidents and incidents investigations.

394

--- Page 204 ---

NATIONAL LAW

QUESTIONS

A pilot can fly an aircraft which is not entered in the aircraft rating of his licence
for endorsement on his licence

A) With in 5 nm of an aerodrome

B) With in Local Flying Area of the aerodrome

C) Any where

A pilot can fly in 30 consecutive days
A) 100 hrs PIC & 50 hrs as Co pilot
B) 100 hrs PIC & 30 hrs as Co pilot
C) 120 hrs PIC & 20 hrs as Co pilot

When an aircraft is being refueled, the refueling must be stopped if a jet aircraft
crosses with in a distance of:

A) 15 meters
B) 30 meters
C) 43 meters

Mathura Refinery is a:
A) Danger Area

B) Restricted area
C) Prohibited area.

A passenger visited a yellow fever infected area on the previous six days, but

is notin possession of valid yellow fever certificate, then action taken by PIC

of the flight is:

A) Send aradio message two hours before the arrival about the state of the health
of the passenger

B) No action required

C) Inform Airlines office after landing

Prisoners on Board an aircraft can be carried with the permission of
A) DGCA

B) Controller of Aerodrome

C) Director General of Prisons

895

10.

11.

12.

13.

AIR REGULATIONS

Smoking on a private aircraft is permitted:

A). Provided the owner has no objection.

B)- Only if the certificate of airworthiness of the aircraft permits.
C) Without restriction if no passengers are carried.

An aircraft without registration markings can be flown only
A) _ Ifthe sale deed is not yet completed

B) For purpose of test flight only, prior to purchase.

C) _ If specially permitted in writing by the central govt.

The member of operating crew shall not have taken alcoholic drinks:
A) . 6hrs before commencement if flight.

B) 12 hrs-before commencement of flight.

C) 24 hrs before commencement of flight.

Photography at an aerodrome can be done with prior permission in writing
from:

A) Aerodrome officer

B) DGCA

C). Central Govt.

While refueling is in progress, no naked fight be brought within
mts:

A) 35
B) 30
C) 100

Apilot flying low due to thunder showers for safety reasons can be sued by:
A). State Govt.

B). Cannot be sued.

C)... Owner of the property over which it is flying.

Aperson can bring to India human remains of a person who has died of plague:

A) Cannot bring.

B) If enclosed in a shell of zinc.

C) _ If enclosed in a hermetically sealed shell of zinc after permission id obtained
from proper authority.

396

--- Page 205 ---

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

NATIONAL LAW

An aerial work aircraft on a IFR plan to Jaipur departs at 1032 hrs UTC. Sunset
time at Jaipur is 1318 UTC. Night landing facilities are not available at Jaipur.
The flying time available to him to reach Jaipur is :

A) 3hrs & 06 minutes.

B) 2hrs & 26min

C) 2hrs &46 min

Minimum crew required on private aircraft is:

A) One pilot.

B) Two pilots

C) As specified in the certificate of the Airworthiness

A person dies of cholera, his body can be brought to india if:

A) Packed in a wooden box.

B) Cannot be brought.

C) Sealed in zinc and packed in a wooden box. Closed in a shell of zinc, joints
sealed, shell enclosed in a teak wooden box which is enclosed in zinc lined
box, filled with saw dust impregnated with carbolic powder.

Dropping of paper leaf lets require the permission of:
A) Aerodrome

B) Local District Magistrate.

C) Operator.

Acertificate of registration is valid from the date of registration to.
A) 1year

B) Till the aircraft is destroyed in an accident

C) Till itis cancelled by DGCA

Before arrival in India a health report is to be sent.
A) Before take off

B) 7 days prior to arrival

C) 2 hours before arrival

If your aircraft is carrying cargo for remuneration, it will be known as a:

A) _ Private aircraft
B) Aerial work aircraft
C) Public transport aircraft

397

21,

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

AIR REGULATIONS

One pilot will be designated as PIC of a public transport aircraft for each flight
by:

A) The operator

B) DGCA

C) Flying contract unit

The privileges of a license can be exercised by a pilot involved in an incident
after:

A) He is cleared by the medical authority

B) Heis cleared by the DGCA

C)  Heis cleared by the ATS authority

No of cabin crew is required according to
A) No. of passengers excluding crew members
B) No. of persons on board including crew members

C) Noofseats
¥

Succession of command is given:
A) In Operation manual

B) by Operator

C) byDGCA

An international flight from India can take off:
A) _ from any aerodrome in India.

B) from any major aerodrome in India.

C) from any custom aerodrome only.

PIC of an aeroplane shall ;

A) _Beresponsible for safe conduct of navigation

B) Be responsible for safe conduct of flight at all times
C) All above is correct

An alc with seating capacity of 150, what is the number of flight attendants
required to be carried on the flight:

A) 2
B) 3
Cc) 4

398

--- Page 206 ---

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

NATIONAL LAW

Every member of the Flight Crew shall get his log book certified for correctness
by the competent authority;

A) At the end of each calendar month

B) At the end of every quarter

C) Atanhalf yearly interval ending Jun and Dec.

If a passenger falls sick on board an a/c and he is suspected of any infectious
disease then PIC’s action is:

A) Toland immediately.

B) To inform health officer of destination aerodrome at least two hrs before landing.
C)  Toinform DGCA.

The incubation period of relapsing fever is. days:
A) 6

B) 7

Cc) 8

Incubation period of yellow fever is days:

A) 6

B) 7

Cc) 8

No authorized person must be present within mts of a/c while refueling
is on

A) 15

B) 30

Cc) 50

Pilots log book is to be preserved for

A) 5 years from the date of starting the log book
B) 5 years from the date of last entry

C)  3yrs from the date of last entry

Medical for a CPL holder is valid for
A) 2years

B) 1year

C) 1 year if age is less than 40 years

399

AIR REGULATIONS

35. Operational Manual is:

A)
B)
C)

Prepared by the operator and authorized by the DGCA
Prepared by the DGCA and authorized by operator
Prepared by the operator and authorized by manufacturer

400

--- Page 207 ---

NATIONAL LAW

ANSWERS

pi t2[3f4 ts [et 7]{ ete] tol a) 12 | 13 | 14
pie i[cel[clalalel{cieie}e] sla lal

(15 [16 | 17 [18 [19 | 20 | 21 | 22 | 23] 24 | 25 | 26 | 27 | 28 |
jefe feltelel{c{alelcla}c}{e lec {el

29 [30 | 31 [32 _| 33 | 34 | 35
Bic }alalsicia |

401

AIR REGULATIONS

402

--- Page 208 ---

15

PERSONNEL LICENSING

(Annex 1, Aircraft Rules,1937)

Introduction: Standards and Recommended Practices for the licensing of flight
crew members (pilots, flight engineers and flight navigators), air traffic controllers,
aeronautical station operators, maintenance technicians and flight dispatchers,
are provided by Annex 1 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation. Related
training manuals provide guidance to States for the scope and depth of training
curricula which will ensure that the confidence in safe air navigation, as intended
by the Convention and Annex 1, is maintained. These training manuals also provide
guidance for the training of other aviation personnel such as aerodrome emergency
crews, flight operations officers, radio operators and individuals involved in other
related disciplines. The medical standards of the Annex, in requiring periodic health
examinations, serve as an early warning for possible incapacitating medical conditions
and contribute to the general health of flight crews and controllers.

NATIONAL PROVISIONS

Licensing Authority:

The authority by which the licences and ratings may be granted, renewed or
varied shall be the Central Government, which may withhold the grant or renewal of
a licence or a rating, if for any reason it considers it desirable to do so.

Educational Qualification:

(a) The minimum educational qualification for the following licences shall be a pass
in Class Ten from a recognised Board or its equivalent examination:

Student Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes/Helicopters/Gliders/Balloons and Microlight
aircraft); Private Pilot’s Licence ( Aeroplanes); Private Pilot’s Licence (helicopters);
Pilot’s Licence (Gliders/Balloons/Microlight aircraft); Flight Radio Telephone
Operator’s Licence.

(b) The minimum educational qualification for the following licences shall be a pass
in class Ten plus Two, with Physics and Mathematics, from a recognised Board/
university or its equivalent examination :

403

AIR REGULATIONS

Commercial] Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes); Commercial Pilot’s Licence (Helicopters);
Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes); Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence
(Helicopters); Student Navigator’s Licence; Flight Navigator’s Licence; Student
Flight Engineer’s Licence; Flight Engineer’s Licence and Flight Radio Telephone
Operator’s Licence.

Cross-country flight:

(a) Across-country flight unless otherwise stated, means a flight to a point beyond a
radius of one hundred nautical miles from the aerodrome of departure whether
over land or sea.

(b) A cross-country flight, for the purpose of PPL and Pilot Licence Microlight shall
mean a flight to a point beyond a radius of fifty nautical miles from the aerodrome
of departure.

Langauage Proficiency:

An applicant for the PPL, CPL, ATPL, Flt Navigator and Flt Engg licences shall
have the ability to speak and understand the English language used for radiotelepohony
communications to the level of proficiency specified by the Director General.

Validity of Medical Fitness:

Medical assessment is valid for 24 months for PPL, Pilot’s Licence, all Student
licences, Flt Engg Licence and FRTOL (Restricted). It is valid for 12 months for ATPL,
CPL, Fit Nav Licence and FRTOL. Where ever 12 months validity is specified, it is
reduced to six months after the age of 40 yrs for single crew commercial operations and
after 60 yrs for multi crew commercial operations. In cases of PPL,Pilot licence, FRTO
and Fit Engg licence, validity of medical will reduce to 12 months after attaining the
age of 50 years.

DGCA will be informed and a fresh medical required for a sickness or injury
involving incapacity for a period of fifteen days or more for the work for which he is
licensed, or an injury sustained in any accident resulting in incapacity to perform
duties.

Validity of Licences:

Licences are valid from the date of issue. Renewal will be done from the date of

expiry provided the application is made with in one month of date of expiry.

PLL, Pilot Licence, FRTO and Fit Engg licence are valid for 10 years. All other
licences are valid for 5 years.

The holder of a pilot’s licence should inform the Authority of any illness which
they are suffering which involves incapacity to undertake those functions to which the
licence relates throughout a period of 15 days or more.

Minimum Age:

No person being under 16 years of age shall have sole control of an aircraft in

motion and no person shall cause or permit any other person to have sole control of

404

--- Page 209 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

an aircraft in motion unless he knows or has reasonable cause to believe such other
person to have attained the age of 16 years. Minimum age for SPL is 16 yrs, PPL 17
yrs, CPL 18 yrs and ATPL 21 yrs.

Maximum age limit for professional pilots. -

(1) No person, holding a pilot’s licence having attained the age of sixty-five years,
shall act as Pilot-in-Command or Co-pilot of an aircraft engaged in commercial air
transport operations.

(2) No person holding a pilot’s licence having attained the age of sixty years , shall act
as Pilot-in-Command or Co-pilot of an arcraft engaged in commercial air transport
operations unless it is operated in a multi-crew environment and the other pilot is
less than sixty years of age. Provided that the provisions of sub-rule (2) shall not
apply in respect of aircraft certified for single pilot operations and not exceeding
an all up weight of 5700 kilograms engaged in commercial air transport operations
within the territory of India and while operating in a multi-crew environment.

STUDENT PILOT’S LICENCE
(AEROPLANES/HELICOPTERS/GLIDERS)

Knowledge —

He shall pass oral examination in Air Regulations, Air Navigation, Aviation
Meteorology and Aircraft and Engines as per the syllabus prescribed by the Director-
General unless he previously held a pilot’s licence of a higher category, or is able to
produce evidence in the manner prescribed by the Director-General that he is well-
versed with the aforesaid subjects.

Security Clearance—

Security clearance for the Student Pilot/Pilot will be obtained from the concerned
State Police authorities by the Flying Club/Government Flying Training School before
the commencement of flying training and furnished to the Director-General.

Renewal—

The licence may be renewed for a period not exceeding twelve months from
the date of fresh medical examination subject to the total validity of the licence not
exceeding twenty four months from the date of issue.

Aircraft Rating—

The licence shall indicate the class and the types of aeroplanes or helicopters or
gliders the holder is entitled to fly. Only those types of aircraft may be entered in the
licence in respect of which the candidate has passed the examination in Aircraft and
Engines.

Privileges—
The privileges of the holder of a Student Pilot’s Licence shall be to fly within
Indian territory only, as Pilot-in-Command of any aeroplane, helicopter or glider

405

AIR REGULATIONS

entered in the aircraft rating of his licence :
Provided that :

(a) he shall fly at all times under the authority and supervision of a Flight
Instructor or an Approved Examiner;

(b) he shall fly under Visual Flight Rules only ;

(c) he shall not carry passengers, animals and goods or fly for hire, reward or
remuneration of any kind;

(d) he shall not undertake cross-country flights unless he has a minimum of ten
hours of solo flight time and has passed the examinations in Air Navigation
and Aviation Meteorology.

The Student Pilot’s Licence shall be issued by a Flying Club/Government Flying

Training School specifically authorised in this regard and subject to the conditions as
laid down by the Director-General.

PRIVATE PILOT’S LICENCE (AEROPLANES)

Knowledge—

He shail pass a written examination in Air Regulations, Air Navigation, Aviation
Meteorology and Aircraft and Engines as per the syllabus prescribed by the Director-
General.

Provided that an applicant in possession of a valid Private Pilot’s Licence
(Helicopters) or a Commercial/Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence (Helicopters) shall
pass an examination in Aircraft and Engines only.

Experience—
He shall produce evidence of having satisfactorily completed as a pilot of an
aeroplane not less than forty hours of flight time which shall include—

Gi) not less than twenty hours of solo flight time;

Gi) not less than five hours of cross-country flight time in as the sole occupant of an
aeroplane including a flight of not less than one hundred and fifty nautical miles
in the course of which full stop landings at two different aerodromes shall have
been made;

(iii) not less than ten hours of solo flight time completed within a period of twelve
moaths immediately preceding the date of application for the issue of licence;

(iv) fatty percent of solo flying experience on microlight aircraft acquired during the
preceding twenty four months from the date of application subject to a maximum
of ten hours, may be credited towards the total experience required for the issue
of the licence.

(v) fifty percent of solo gliding experience shall count towards total flying experience
requirement subject to a maximum of ten hours towards total flight time.

406

--- Page 210 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

Flying Training—
He shall have completed flying training in accordance with the syllabus
prescribed by the Director-General.

Skill—

He shall have demonstrated his competency to perform as a Pilot-incommand or
a Co-pilot of an aeroplane, the procedures and manoeuvres prescribed in the syllabus,
to the satisfaction of an Examiner, on the type of aeroplane to which the application
for the licence relates, within a period of six months immediately preceding the date of
application.

Renewal—
The licence may be renewed on receipt of satisfactory evidence of the applicant:—

(a) having undergone a medical examination; and

(b) having satisfactorily completed not less than five hours of flight time as Pilot-
incommand of an aeroplane within a period of twelve months immediately
preceding the date of application for renewal or in lieu thereof, having satisfactorily
completed the flying test within a period of six months immediately preceding the
date of application.

Ratings—

(a) Aircraft Rating— The licence shall indicate the class and the types of aeroplanes
the holder is entitled to fly. An open rating for all single piston engine types of
aeroplanes having an all-up weight not exceeding one thousand five hundred Kgs.
may also be granted if he has completed not less than two hundred and fifty hours
as Pilot-in-command and has at least four different types of aeroplanes entered in
the aircraft rating of his licence :

Provided that the privileges of the open rating shall be exercised only after having
undergone a ground and flight familiarisation with a Flight Instructor or an
approved Examiner for the type of aircraft and a certificate to this effect shall be
recorded by the Flight Instructor/Examiner in the Pilot’s Log Book before the Pilot
is released to exercise the privileges of his open-rating.

(b) Night Rating— Night Rating entitles the holder of the licence to carry passengers
at night. Conditions for the issue of this rating are detailed below:

(i) he must have completed not less than fifty hours of flight time as Pilot-
incommand and as sole manipulator of the controls including not less than
five hours by night, which must include a minimum of five take-offs and
five landings carried out within the preceding six months of the date of
application;

(ii) he must have completed a dual cross-country flight by night of at least one
hundred nautical miles before he can be permitted to undertake sole cross
country flights by night, and

(iii) he must have completed not less than five hours of dual instructions in

407

AIR REGULATIONS

instrument flying which may include not more than two and a half hours on
an approved synthetic flight trainer.
(c) Instrument Rating— Instrument rating entitles the holder of the licence to fly
under the Instrument Flight Rules. .

Extension of Aircraft Rating—

For extension of Aircraft Rating to include an additional type of aeroplane, an
applicant shall be required to produce evidence of —

(a) having passed written examination in Aircraft and Engines ;

(b) having undergone adequate dual instructions and solo flying to gain competency
on the type;

(c) having satisfactorily completed the flight test on the type within a period of six
months immediately preceding date of application for the extension of Aircraft
Rating.

Privileges—

The privileges of the holder of a Private Pilot’s Licence shall be to act, but not for

remuneration, as Pilot-oncommand or as Co-pilot of any aeroplane which is entered in
the Aircraft Rating of his licence and carry passengers therein :

Provided that —

@) no flight is undertaken for hire or remuneration of any kind, whatsoever;

(ii) the passengers are carried by night only when the holder of licence is in
possession of a valid night rating and has carried out not less than five take-
offs and five landings by night as Pilot-in-command within a period of six
months immediately preceding the date of intended flight; and

Gii) no flight shall be undertaken under the Instrument Flight Rules without
being in possession of a valid Instrument Rating.

COMMERCIAL PILOT’S LICENCE (AEROPLANES)

Knowledge—

He shall pass a written examination in Air Regulations, Air Navigation
Meteorology and aircraft and Engines and Signals (practical) examination for
interpretation of aural and visual signals, as per the syllabus prescribed by the
Director-General.

Provided that the holder of a current Commercial Pilot’s Licence (Helicopters)
shall be required to pass an examination in Aircraft and Engines only.
Experience—

He shall produce evidence of having satisfactorily completed as a pilot of an
aeroplane on the date of application for licence not less than two hundred hours of
flight time, which shall include—

408

--- Page 211 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

(i) not less than one hundred hours of flight time as Pilot-in-Command of which not
less than fifteen hours shall have been completed within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application for licence;

Gi) not less than twenty hours of cross-country flight time as Pilot-in-Command
including a cross-country flight of not less than three hundred nautical miles in
the course of which full stop landings at two different aerodromes shall be made;

(iii) not less than ten hours of instrument time of which not more than five hours may
be on an approved simulator; and

(iv) not less than five hours of flight time by night including a minimum of ten takeoffs
and ten landings as Pilot-in-Command as (sole manipulator of controls) carried
out within six months immediately precedings the date of application for licence.

Provided that in case of an applicant who is in possession of a Commercial
Pilot’s Licence (Helicopters/Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence (Helicopters) and who has
satisfactorily completed not less than 1000 hours of flight time as Pilot-in-Command
of a helicopter, the above experience requirement of two hundred hours as pilot of an
aeroplane shall be reduced to one hundred hours, which shall include —

(i) Not less than seventy five hours of flight time as pilot-in-command including
a minimum of twenty five hours of cross country flight time and ten hours of
instrument time of which not less than five hours may be on approved simulator;

(ii) Not less than five hours of flight time by night including ten takeoffs and landing
patterns; and

(iii) Not less than ten hours of flight time on aeroplane within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application for issue of licence.

Flying Training—
He shall have completed the flying training in accordance with the syllabus
prescribed by the Director-General.

Other Requirements—

He shall be in possession of a current Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence
for operation of radio telephone apparatus on board an aircraft issued by the Director-
General.

Skill—

He shall have demonstrated his competency to perform the procedures and
manoeuvres prescribed in the syllabus to the satisfaction of an examiner, on the type
of aeroplane to which the application for licence relates, within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application. The Director General may, however,
allow Skill Test or part thereof to be carried out on aircraft/ approved Zero Flight
Time Training simulator level ‘D’ for the type of aircraft. The competency shall be
demonstrated as in —

409

AIR REGULATIONS

@ general flying test by day;
Gi) general flying test by night;

Gii) a cross-country flight test by day consisting of a flight of not less than two hundred
fifty nautical miles in the course of which at least one full stop landing at an
aerodrome other than the aerodrome of departure shall be made; and

(iv) a cross-country flying test by night consisting of a flight of not less than one
hundred twenty nautical miles returning to the place of departure without landing
elsewhere.

Renewal—
The licence may be renewed on receipt of satisfactory evidence of the applicant—

(a) having undergone a medical examination;

(b) having satisfactorily completed not less than ten hours of flight time as Pilot-in
Command (Fifty percent of flight time as Co-Pilot may be counted towards the
requirement of flight time as Pilot-in-Command) within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application for renewal; or in lieu thereof,
having satisfactorily completed the general flying test by day and night within
the same period;

(c) having a current Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence for operation of radio
telephone apparatus on board an aircraft, issued by the Director-General.

Aircraft Rating—
(a) The licence shall indicate the types of aeroplane the holder is entitled to fly.

(b) An open rating for all single piston engine type of aeroplane having an all up
weight not exceeding one thousand five hundred Kgs. may also be granted if he
has completed not less than one thousand hours of flight time on such types of
aeroplanes including not less than five hundred hours as Pilot-in-Command and
has at least four different types of aircraft entered in the aircraft rating of his
licence:

Provided that the privileges of the open rating shall be exercised only after
having undergone a ground and flight familiarisation with a flight Instructor
or an approved Examiner and a certificate to this effect shall be recorded by
the Examiner in the pilot’s log book, before the pilot is released to exercise the
privileges of open rating on that type of aircraft.

() Instruetor’s Rating— Instructor’s Rating entitles the holder to impart flying
instructions.

(d) Instrument Rating— Instrument Rating entitles the holder to fly under
Instrument Flight Rules.

410

--- Page 212 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

Extension of Aircraft Rating—

For extension of aircraft rating to include an additional type of aeroplane, an
applicant shall be required to produce evidence of —

(i) having passed a written examination in Aircraft and Engines and of having
gained, under appropriate supervision, experience in flying the aircraft of such
type or on approved flight simulator in respect of the following, namely:-

(a) normal flight procedures and manoeuvres during all phases of flight;

(b) abnormal and emergency procedures and manoeuvres in the event of
failures and malfunctions of equipment, such as power plant, systems and
airframe;

(c) where applicable, instrument procedures, including instrument approach,
missed approach and landing procedures under normal, abnormal and
emergency conditions, including simulated engine failure;

(d) procedures for crew incapacitation and crew coordination including
allocation of pilot tasks crew cooperation and use of check lists; and

(ii) having satisfactorily completed the general flying tests by day and night in respect
of the type of aircraft for which the extension of aircraft rating is desired. Such
flying tests shall have been completed within a period of six months immediately
preceding the date of the application for extension of the aircraft rating.

Proficiency Check—

(a) In order to act as a co-pilot of transport aeroplanes having an all-up weight
exceeding five thousand seven hundred kilograms, the licence holder shall be
required to undergo an appropriate proficiency check as specified by the Director-
General, in respect of the type of aircraft to be flown.

(b) The proficiency check carried out shall be valid for a period of six months from the
date of the check and shall be renewed for a further period of six months at a time.

(c) In the case of renewal, the period of validity shall commence from the date of
expiry of the previous validity provided that the check has been carried out within
two months preceding the date of expiry.

Privileges—
The privileges of the holder of a Commercial Pilot’s Licence shall be :—

(a) to exercise all the privileges of Private Pilot’s Licence;

(b) toact as Pilot-in-Command of any aeroplane having an all-up-weight not exceeding
five thousand seven hundred Kgs. and which is entered in the aircraft rating of
his licence provided that when passengers are to be carried at night, he shall have
carried out within a period of six months immediately preceding the date of the
intended flight not less than ten take-offs and ten landings by night as Pilot-in-
Command:

411

AIR REGULATIONS

(c) to act as Co-Pilot of any aeroplane where a Co-Pilot is required to be carried and
which is entered in the aircraft rating of his licence : Provided that for all flights
under the Instrument Flight Rules, either as Pilot-in- Command or as Co-Pilot, he
shall have a current Instrument Rating:

Provided also that on attainment of the age of sixty-five years, such privileges
shall be restricted to that of Private Pilot’s Licence Aeroplanes).

COMMERCIAL PILOT’S LICENCE (AEROPLANES)
WITH INSTRUMENT RATING
Knowledge -
He shall pass a written examination in Air Regulations, Air Navigation,
Meteorology and Aircraft and Engines and Signals (practical) examination for

interpretation of aural and visual signals, as per the syllabus prescribed by the
Director-General:

Provided that the holder of a current Commercial Pilot’s Licence (Helicopters)
shall be required to pass an examination in Aircraft and Engines and Instrument
Rating only.

Experience -

He shall produce evidence of having satisfactorily completed as a pilot of an
aeroplane within a period of five years immediately preceding the date of application
for licence not less than two hundred hours of flight time, which shall include —

G) not less than hundred hours of flight time as Pilot-in-Command out of which
not.less than thirty hours flight time as Student Pilot-in-Command which shall
include not more than twenty hours of cross country flight time and not more than
ten hours circuits-landings with minimum ten landings;

Gi) not less than fifteen hours time as Pilot-in-Command flight time within a period
of six months immediately preceding the date of application;

Gii) not less than fifty hours cross-country flight time as Pilot-in-Command including
a cross-country flight of not less than three hundred nautical miles in the course
of which full stop landings at two different aerodromes shall be made;

(iv) not less than fifty hours of instrument time of which not more than twenty
hours may be on an approved simulator, out of which minimum of five hours
of instrument time shall have been completed within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application for the Instrument Rating; and

(v) not less tha five hours time by night including a minimum of ten take offs and ten
landings as Pilot-in-Command (as sole manipulator of controls) carried out within
six months immediately preceding the date of application for licence:

412

--- Page 213 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

Provided that in case of an applicant who is in Possession of 4 Commercial
Pilot’s Licence (Helicopters) and who has satisfactorily completed not less than
one thousand hours of flight time as Pilot-in-Command of a helicopter, the above
experience requirement of two hundred hours as pilot of an airplane shall be
reduced to hundred hours.

Note- The student-pilot-in- command flight time shall not be logged by instructor in his
own log book. Student log book shall indicate student pilot-incommand flight time in
remarks column as SPIC with the name of the instructor.

Flying Training -
He shall have completed the flying training in accordance with the syllabus
prescribed by the Director-General.

Other Requirements -

He shall be in possession of a current Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence
for operation of radio telephone apparatus on board an aircraft Issued by the Director-
General.

Skill -

He shall have demonstrated his competency to perform the procedures and
manoeuvres prescribed in the syllabus to the satisfaction of an examiner, on the type
of aeroplane to which the application for licence relates, within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application. The competency shall be demonstrated
in -

@) general flying test by day;
Gi) general flying test by night;
Gii) a cross-country flight test by day consisting of a flight of not less than two hundred

fifty nautical miles in the course of which at least one full stop landing at an
aerodrome other than the aerodrome of departure shall be made;

(iv) a cross-country flying test by night consisting of a flight of not less than one
hundred twenty nautical miles returning to the place of departure without landing
elsewhere; and

(v) ability to fly an aeroplane is respect of which Instrument Rating is desired, solely
with the aid of instruments by undergoing an instrument flying test within a
period of six months immediately preceding the date of application for the rating.
The flying test shall be carried out in accordance with the syllabus prescribed by
the Director-General. The Director-General may, however, allow such tests or part
thereof to be carried out on an approved simulator for the type of aircraft.

Renewal ~
The licence may be renewed on receipt of satisfactory evidence of the applicant.

(a) having undergone a medical examination

413

AIR REGULATIONS

(b) having satisfactorily completed not less than ten hours of flight time as Pilot-in-
Command (Fifty percent of flight time as Co-Pilot may be counted towards the
requirement of flight time as Pilot-in-Command) within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application for renewal, or in lieu thereof,
having satisfactorily completed the general flying test by day and night within
the same period; and

(c) having a current Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence for operation of radio
telephone apparatus on board an aircraft, issued by the Director-General.

Rating -
(a) The licence shall indicate the types of aeroplane the holder is entitled to fly.

(b) Open Rating - An open rating for all single piston engine type of aeroplanes
having an all-up-weight not exceeding one thousand five hundered Kgs. may also
be granted if he has completed not less than one thousand hours of flight time on
such types of aeroplanes including not less than five hundred hours as Pilot-in-
Command and has at least four different types of aircraft entered in the aircraft
rating of his licence:

Provided that the privileges of the open rating shall be exercised only after
having undergone a ground and flight familiarization with a flight Instructor
or an approved Examiner and a certificate to this effect shall be recorded by
the Examiner in the pilot’s log book, before the pilot is released to exercise the
privileges of open rating on that type of aircraft.

(c) Instructor’s Rating — Instructor’s Rating entitles the holder to impart flying
instructions.

(d) Instrument Rating— No separate Instrument Rating is provided in the licence.
The privileges of instrument rating are included in the privileges of this licence
provided that the instrument rating flying tests have been carried out as per the
conditions laid down by the Director-General.

Extension of Aircraft Rating -

For extension of aircraft rating to include an additional type of aeroplane, an
applicant shall be required to produce evidence of -

@) having passed a written examination in Aircraft and Engines as mentioned in
para 1(d) and of having gained, under appropriate supervision, experience in
flying the aircraft of such type or on approved flight simulator in respect of the
following, namely:-

(a) normal flight procedures and manoeuvres during all phases of flight;

(b) abnormal and emergency procedures and manoeuvers in the event of
failures and malfunctions of equipment, such as power plant, systems and
airframe;

414

--- Page 214 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

(c) where applicable, instrument procedures, including instrument approach,
missed approach and landing procedures under normal, abnormal and
emergency conditions, including simulated engine failure;

(a) procedures for crew incapacitation and crew coordination including
allocation of pilot task, crew cooperation and use of check lists; and

(ii) having satisfactorily completed the general flying tests by day and night in
accordance with para 1(h) in respect of the type of aircraft for which the extension
of aircraft rating is desired. Such flying tests shall have been completed within a
period of six months immediately preceding the date of application for extension
of the aircraft rating.

Proficiency Check—

(a) In order to act as a co-pilot of transport aeroplanes having an all-up weight
exceeding five thousand seven hundred kilograms, the licence holder shall be
required to undergo an appropriate proficiency check as specified by the Director-
General, in respect of the type of aircraft to be flown.

(b) The proficiency check carried out shall be valid for a period of six months from the
date of the check and shall be renewed for a further period of six months at a time.

(c) In the case of renewal, the period of validity shall commence from the date of
expiry of the previous validity provided that the check has been carried out within
two months preceding the date of expiry.

Privileges —

The privileges of the holder of a Commercial Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes) shall
be:

(a) to exercise all the privileges of Private Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes);

(b) to act as Pilot-in-Command of any aeroplane having an all-upweight not exceeding
five thousand seven hundred Kgs. And which is entered in the aircraft rating of
his licence provided that when passengers are to be carried at night, he shall have

carried out within a period of six months immediately preceding the date of the
intended flight not less than ten take-offs and ten landings by night as Pilot-in-

Command:

(c) to act as Co-Pilot of any aeroplane where a Co-pilot is required to be carried and
which is entered in the aircraft rating of his licence:

Provided that for all flights under the Instrument Flight Rules, either as Pilot-in-
Command or as Co-pilot, he shall have demonstrated his competency.

415

AIR REGULATIONS

AIRLINE TRANSPORT PILOT’S LICENCE (AEROPLANES)

Knowledge—

He shall pass a written and oral examination in Air Regulations, Air Navigation,
Avionics (Radio Aids and Instruments), Aviation Meteorology and Aircraft and Engines,
and Signals (Practical) examination for interpretation of aural and visual signals as
per the syllabus prescribed by the Director-General.

Note: — Holder of a current Commercial Pilot’s Licence, shall not be required to pass
the examination in Air Regulations and that of Senior Commercial Pilot’s Licence shall
not be required to pass any of the examinations.

Experience—

He shall produce evidence of having satisfactorily completed as a Pilot of an
aeroplane not less than one thousand five hundred hours of flight time and his total
flying experience shall include —

(i) not less than two hundred and fifty hours of flight time as Pilot-in-Command
or as CoPilot performing, under the supervision of a pilot who fulfills the flying
experience requirements of a check pilot, the duties and functions of a pilot-in-
command provided that at least one hundred hours out of these shall be cross-
country flight time, including not less than fifty hours of flight time by night.

Note— Where an aeroplane is required to be operated with a co-pilot in accordance
with the provisions of the Flight Manual of the aeroplane, not more than fifty
percent of the co-pilot flight time shall be credited towards the total flight time
required for the issue of the licence, but not more than fifty percent of the co-pilot
flight time under supervision shall be credited towards pilot-in-command flight
experience required for issue of the licence, and full credit for such flight time shall
be given towards total flight time required for issue of the licence.

(ii) not less than five hundred hours of total cross-country flight time;
(iii) not less than seventy five hours of flight time by night;

(iv) not less than one hundred hours of instrument time under actual or simulated
instrument conditions of which not less than fifty hours shall be in actual flight;

(v) not less than twenty hours of flight time completed within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application for the licence.

Other Requirements—

(i) He shall be the holder of a Commercial or a Senior Commercial Pilot’s Licence.
However, this will not be applicable for the issue of Airline Transport Pilot’s
Licence to a pilot from Armed Forces who otherwise meets the requirements;

(ii) He shall have a current Instrument Rating on multi-engine aircraft;

416

--- Page 215 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

(iii) He shall be in possession of a current Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence
for operation of radio telephone apparatus on board an aircraft issued by the
Director-General.

Skill—

He shall have demonstrated his competency to perform by day and by night
the procedures and manoeuvres prescribed in the syllabus to the satisfaction of the
Examiner, on the type of multi-engine aeroplane to which the application for licence
relates within a period of six months immediately preceding the date of application.

The Director General may, however, allow skill tests or part thereof to be carried
out on aircraft/approved Zero flight Time Training simulator level ‘D’ for the type of
aircraft.

Note :— The holder of a current Commercial Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes)/Senior
Commercial Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes) issued by the Director-General shall not be
required to undergo general flying tests for the issue of Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence
(Aeroplanes) provided that the licence is issued on the type or types of multi-engine
aeroplane or aeroplanes, as the case may be, included in the aircraft rating of Commercial
Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes) or Senior Commercial Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes) and the
pilot possesses ten hours of flying experience as Pilot-in-Command or twenty hours as
Copilot at least on one such multi-engine type within the preceding six months.

Renewal—
The Licence may be renewed on receipt of satisfactory evidence of the applicant—

(a) having undergone a medical examination.

(b) having satisfactorily completed not less than ten hours flight time as Pilot-in-
Command (fifty percent of flight time as Co-Pilot may be counted towards the
requirements of flight time as Pilot-in-Command) within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application for renewal, or in lieu thereof ;
having satisfactorily completed the flying tests by day and by night.

(c) having a current flight Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence, for operation of radio
telephone apparatus on board an aircraft, issued by the Director-General.

(d) having a current Instrument Rating on a multi-engine aircraft.

Ratings—

(a) Aircraft Rating— The licence shall indicate the class and the types of aeroplanes
the holder is entitled to fly. An open rating for all types of aeroplanes having all-
up-weight not exceeding five thousand seven hundred Kgs. may also be granted
if he has completed not less than one thousand hours of flight-time as a Pilot-in-
Command on any aeroplane having an all-up-weight of fourteen thousand Kgs. or
above.

(b) Instructor’s Rating— Instructor's Rating entitles the holder to impart flying
instructions.

417

AIR REGULATIONS

(c) Instrument Rating— No separate Instrument Rating is provided in the licence.
The privileges of instrument rating are included in the privileges of the licence
provided that the instrument rating flying tests have been carried out as per the
conditions laid down by the Director-General. Conditions for validity and renewal
of instrument rating shall be as are laid down in Section O of this Schedule.

Extension of Aircraft Rating—

For extension of aircraft rating to include an additional type of aeroplane, an
applicant shall be required to produce evidence of

(i) having passed a written examination in Aircraft and Engines and of having
gained, under appropriate supervision, experience in flying the aircraft of such
type or on approved flight simulator in respect of the following, namely:

(a) normal flight procedures and manoeuvres during all phases of flight;

(b) abnormal and emergency procedures and manoeuvres in the event of
failures and malfunctions of equipment, such as power plant, systems and
airframe;

(c) where applicable, instrument procedures, including instrument approach,
missed approach and landing procedures under normal, abnormal and
emergency conditions, including simulated engine failure;

(d) procedures for crew incapacitation and crew coordination including
allocation of pilot tasks, crew cooperation and use of check lists; and

(ii) having satisfactorily completed the general flying tests by day and night in
accordance with para 1(h) in respect of the type of aircraft for which the extension
of aircraft rating is desired. Such flying tests shall have been completed within
a period of six months immediately preceding the date of the application for
extension of the aircraft rating.

Proficiency Check—

(a) In order to act as a pilot-in-command or co-pilot of transport aeroplanes having
an all-up weight exceeding five thousand seven hundred kilograms, the licence
holder shall be required to undergo an appropriate proficiency check as specified
by the Director-General, in respect of the type of aircraft to be flown.

(b) The proficiency check carried out as per para (a) shall be valid for a period of six
months from the date of the check and shall be renewed for a further period of six
months at a time.

(c) In the case of renewal, the period of validity shall commence from the date of
expiry of the previous validity provided that the check has been carried out within
two months preceding the date of expiry.

Privileges—
The privileges of the holder of an Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence shall be :-—

(a) to exercise the privileges of a private, a Commercial and a Senior Commercial
Pilot’s Licence;

418

--- Page 216 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

(b) to act as Pilot-in-Command or as Co-Pilot of any aeroplane where a Co-Pilot is
required to be carried and which is entered in the aircraft rating of his licence :

Provided that he shall not act as Pilot-in-Command of an aeroplane having a all-
upweight exceeding five thousand seven hundred Kgs. unless he has completed on
that type of aeroplane not less than one hundred hours of flight time as a Co-Pilot,
followed by ten consecutive satisfactory route checks of which not less than five
shall be by night under the supervision of a Check Pilot, performing the duties
and functions of a Pilot-in-command and has demonstrated his competency to fly
as a Pilot-in-Command to the satisfaction of the Director-General.

Provided also that for all IFR flights as Pilot-in-Command or as Co-pilot, he shall
be required to have current Instrument Rating.

Provided also that on attainment of the age of sixty-five years, such privileges
shall be restricted to that of Private Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes).

INSTRUMENT RATING (AEROPLANES)

Knowledge—

He shall pass a written and oral examination in Air Regulations, Air Navigation,
Aviation Meteorology and Instrument Rating as per syllabus prescribed by the
Director-General for issue of Commercial Pilot’s Licence. He shall also pass a practical
test on interpretation of aural and visual signals as per the syllabus prescribed by the
Director-General. :

Experience—
He shall produce evidence of having satisfactorily completed as a pilot of an aeroplane—

(i) not less than one hundred hours of flight time as a Pilot-in-Command including
not less than fifty hours of cross-country flight time;

(ii) not less than forty hours of instrument time of which not more than twenty hours
shall be instrument ground time. A minimum of five hours of instrument time
shall have been completed within a period of six months immediately preceding
the date of application for the Instrument Rating :

Provided that in the case a pilot who holds a current Instrument Rating
(Helicopters), he shall have not less than one hundred hours of flight time as Pilot-
in-Command of an aeroplane including not less than twenty five hours of cross
country flight time and not less than twenty hours of instrument time of which not
more than ten hours may be on an approved simulator.

Other Requirements —

He shall be :
Gi) holder of a current Pilot’s Licence (Aeroplanes);

Gi) holder of a current Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence for operation of

419

AIR REGULATIONS

radio telephone apparatus on board an aircraft issued by the Director-General.
Flying Training—

He shall have completed the flying training in accordance with the syllabus as
prescribed by the Director-General.

Skill—

He shall have demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Examiner his competency
to fly an aeroplane in respect of which Instrument Rating is desired, solely with the aid
of instruments by undergoing an instrument flying test within a period of six months
immediately preceding the date of application for the rating. The flying test shall be
carried out in accordance with the syllabus as prescribed by the Director-General. The
Director General may, however, allow such tests or part thereof to be carried out on an
approved simulator for the type of aircraft.

Validity—

(a) The rating shall be valid for a period of twelve months from the date of the
instrument rating flying test.

(b) It shall be renewed for a further period of twelve months at a time from the date of
expiry provided that the instrument rating flying test has been carried out within
two months preceding the date of expiry and all other requirements for renewal
are met.

(c) In other cases, the validity of renewal of the rating shall commence from the date
of the test.

Renewal—

The Instrument Rating may be renewed on receipt of satisfactory evidence of the
applicant :

(a) having satisfactorily completed the Instrument Rating Flight Test

(b) having a valid Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s Licence issued by the
DirectorGeneral for operation of radio telephone apparatus on board an aircraft.

Extension of Instrument Rating—

For extension of Instrument Rating to include an additional type of aeroplane, an
applicant shall be required to produce evidence of having satisfactorily completed the
flight tec: in accordance with para 1(e) in respect of the type of aeroplane for which the
extension of Instrument Rating is desired. The flight test shall have been completed
within a period of six months immediately preceding the date of application for the
extension of Instrument Rating.

Privileges—
Subject to the validity of the Instrument Rating, the privileges of the holder
thereof shall be to fly under the Instrument Flight Rules, the types of aeroplanes on

which he has demonstrated his competency. Provided that a pilot, who has demonstrated
his competency by undergoing an Instrument Rating Flight test on a single-engine

420

--- Page 217 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

aeroplane not exceeding an all-up-weight of five thousand seven hundred Kgs., shall
exercise the privileges of his Instrument Rating on all single engine aeroplanes within
the aforesaid weight category:

Provided further that a pilot, who has demonstrated his competency by undergoing
an Instrument Rating Flight test on a Multi-engine aeroplane not exceeding an all-
up-weight of five thousand seven hundred Kgs., shall exercise the privileges of his
Instrument Rating on all multiengine aeroplanes within the aforesaid weight category.
Notwithstanding anything said here-in-before, the holder of an Instrument Rating on
any transport aeroplane, shall exercise his privileges only on the type of aeroplane on
which the Instrument Rating Flight test has been satisfactorily carried out;

Provided further that the holder of an Instrument Rating on aeroplanes having an
all-upweight exceeding five thousand seven hundred Kgs. shall exercise the privileges
of his Instrument Rating only on the type of aeroplane on which the Instrument Rating
Flight test has been satisfactorily carried out.

Provided also that, notwithstanding anything said herein before, the holder of
an Instrument Rating on any multi-engine aeroplane may exercise the privileges of
Instrument Rating on any single engine aeroplane entered in the aircraft rating of his
licence.

421

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

An applicant for an Airline Transport Pilot Licence shall have completed in

aeroplanes not less than:

A) 100 hours of instrument time, of which not more than 50 hours may be
instrument ground time

B) 150 hours of instrument time, of which not more than 75 hours may be
instrument ground time

C) 100 hours of instrument time, of which not more than 30 hours may be
instrument ground time

The holder of a pilot’s licence should inform the Authority of any illness which
they are suffering which involves incapacity to undertake those functions to
which the licence relates throughout a period of a certain number of days or
more. The number of days is:

A) 15
B) 20
Cc) 30

The International Civil Aviation Convention Annex containing standards and
recommended practices for Personnel Licensing is:

A) Annex 1
B) Annex 2
C) Annex 11

The holder of a commercial pilot licence, when acting as copilot of an aircraft

required to be operated with a copilot, shall be entitled to be credit with not

more than:

A) 40% of the copilot flight time towards the total flight time required for a higher
grade of a pilot licence

B) 50% of the copilot flight time towards the total flight time required for renewal
of a commercial pilot licence

C) 100 hours of flying time required for a higher grade of a pilot licence

The minimum age of obtaining a PPL is:

A) 18 years
B) 17 years
C) 21 years

422

--- Page 218 ---

10.

11.

PERSONNEL LICENSING

The privileges of the holder of a Commercial Pilot Licence-aeroplane shall be:

A) _ to act as pilot-in-command in any aeroplane engaged in commercial air
transportation

B) to act as pilot-in-command in any aeroplane certificate for single pilot operation
other than in commercial air transportation

C) to act as Pilot-in-Command of any aeroplane having an all-up-weight not
exceeding five thousand seven hundred Kgs. and which is entered in the
aircraft rating of his licence

The duration of the period of currency of a medical assessment shall begin on
the date:

A) _ the license is issued or renewed

B) reckoned from the date of medical examination

C) _ the license is delivered to the pilot

Type ratings shall be established
A) _ for any type of aircraft whenever considered necessary by the authority

B) all the answers are correct
C) _ only aircraft certificated for operation with a minimum crew of at least two pilots

The holder of a commercial pilot licence when as Co-Pilot performing under

the supervision of a pilot who fulfills the flying experience requirements of a

check pilot, the duties and functions of a pilot-in-command shall be entitled to

be credited:

A) _ in full with his flight time but not more than 300 hours towards the total time
required for a higher grade of pilot licence

B) 50% of the flight time towards the total time required for higher grade of pilot
licence in accordance with the requirements of the licensing authority

C) _ in full with his flight time towards the total time required for higher grade of pilot
licence

An applicant holding a private or commercial pilot license aeroplane for the
issue of an instrument rating, shall have completed....hours of cross-country
flight time as pilot-in-command of aircraft in categories acceptable to the
licensing Authority

A) 20 hours
B) 40 hours
C) 50 hours

An applicant for an Airline Transport Pilot Licence shall have completed in
aeroplanes not less than:

A) 75 hours of night flight as pilot-in-command or as copilot

B) 100 hours of night flight as pilot-in-command or as copilot

C} 100 hours of night flight only as pilot-in-command

423

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

AIR REGULATIONS

For Commercial Pilot Licence aeroplane the applicant shall have completed in
aeroplanes not less than..... if the privileges of the licence are to be expected
at:

A) 5 hours of night flight time including 3 take-offs and 3 landings as pilot-in-

command

B) 5 hours of night flight time including 5 take-offs and 5 landings as pilot-in-
command

C) 5 hours of night flight time including 10 take-offs and 10 landings as pilot-in-
command

An applicant for a Commercial Pilot License aeroplane shall have completed in
aeroplanes not less than: ,

A) — 150 hours of flight time and 100 hours as pilot-in-command

B) 200 hours of flight time and 70 hours as pilot-in-command

C) 200 hours of flight time and 100 hours as pilot-in-command

An applicant for a Commercial Pilot Licence shall have completed in aeroplanes

not less than:

A) 20 hours of instrument instruction time of which not more than 10 hours may be
instrument ground time

B) 20 hours of instrument instruction time of which not more than 5 hours may be
instrument ground time

C) not less than ten hours of instrument time of which not more than five hours
may be on an approved simulator

When the holders of aircraft transport pilot licenses aeroplane and helicopter
have passed their 40th birthday the medical examination shall be reduced to:
A) 6 months for single crew commercial operations

B) 6 months for all commercial operations

C) 6 months for all operations

The applicant to exercise the functions of an Instrumental Flight Rating in
____aeroplanes shall prove, according to ANNEX 1, PERSONNEL LICENSING,
his/her capability to pilot such aircraft only by instrumental rules and an
engine___.

A) — Multi-engine/ inoperative or simulated inoperative

B) __Land/ inactive

C) Amphibious/ inactive or simulated inactive

424

--- Page 219 ---

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

PERSONNEL LICENSING

The applicant for an Airline Transport Pilot License shall have completed in
aeroplanes not less than ....hours of cross-country flight time, including not
less than .... hours of flight time by night as Pilot-in-Command or as Co-Pilot
performing, under the supervision of a pilot who fulfills the flying experience
requirements of a check pilot, the duties and functions of a pilot-in-command.
A) 200 hours and 50 hours
B) 250 hours and 50 hours
C) 200 hours and 75 hours

An applicant for a Commercial Pilot Licence-aeroplane shall have completed
not less than....hours of cross country flight time as pilot-in-command including
across country flight totaling not less than.... km(....NM), in the course of which
full stop landings at two different aerodromes shall be made. The hours and
distance referred are:

A) 15 hours and 540km (300NM)

B) 20 hours and 540km (300NM)

C) 10 hours and 270km (150NM)

An applicant for a Commercial Pilot Licence shall hold a current

A) class 1 medical assessment
B) class 3 medical assessment

‘C) _ class medical assessment as prescribed by the state issuing the licence

The age of an applicant for a Commercial Pilot Licence shall not be less than:
A) 17 years of age
B) 18 years of age
C) 16 years of age

To be able to execute a public transport flight, the minimum and maximum age
(with ATPL) is:

A) 21 and 65 years

B) 16 and 60 years

C) 18and 60 years

Which of the following Annexes to the Chicago convention contains minimum
specifications for a crew licence to have international validity?

A) Annex 1
B) Annex3
C) Annex4

425

AIR REGULATIONS

23. Anapplicantfor the--------- licences shall have the ability to speak and understand

the English language used for radiotelepohony communications to the level of
proficiency specified by the Director General.

A) PPL, CPL, ATPL, Fit Navigator and Fit Engg

B) PPL, CPL, ATPL only

C) PPLonly

24. The privileges of the holder of a Private Pilot’s Licence shall be to act as

A) _ Pilot-in-command or as Co-pilot of any aeroplane provided no passengers
are carried

B) __Pilot-in -command or as Co-pilot of any aeroplane and carry passengers therein
with out remunerations

C) _ Pilot-in -command or as Co-pilot of any aeroplane employed on aerial work for
remuneration

25. If the age of a CPL holder flying a single pilot helicopter for charters is more

than 40 years the validity of medical is for.
A)  §& months.

B) 12 months.

C) 12 months if he is not carrying VIPs.

426

--- Page 220 ---

PERSONNEL LICENSING

ANSWERS

Pt yz y3T4 ts Tetz7{[ests |o {[" |
pata late tete{[s tateltc je |

2 [3 [mw [1 [ie [7 | te | 19 | 20 | a | 2 |
pete fete favtats tate {a {aA |

| 23 | 24 | 25 |
pA je] A

427

AIR REGULATIONS

428

--- Page 221 ---

16

AIRWORTHINESS OF
AIRCRAFT

(Annex 8, Rules of the Air,1937)

Introduction: In the interest of safety, an aircraft must be designed, constructed
and operated in compliance with the appropriate airworthiness requirements of the
State of Registry of the aircraft. Consequently, the aircraft is issued with a Certificate
of Airworthiness declaring that the aircraft is fit to fly.

Compatibility: Standards of Annex 6, Part I dealing with aeroplane performance
operating limitations contains Standards that are complementary to the airworthiness
Standards of Annex 8. Both state broad objectives, Annex 8 deals airworthiness from
engeneering point of view whereas Annex 6 covers the subject from operational and

safety point of view.

International Obligations: The Council has urged Contracting States not to
impose on visiting aeroplanes operational requirements other than those established
by the State of Registry, provided those requirements are not lower than the Standards
of Annex 6, Part I.

To facilitate the import and export of aircraft, as well as the exchange of aircraft
for lease, charter or interchange, and to facilitate operations of aircraft in international
air navigation, ICAO places the burden on the State of Registry to recognize and
render valid an airworthiness certificate issued by another Contracting State, subject
to the condition that the airworthiness requirements under which such a certificate is
issued or rendered valid are equal to or above the minimum standards which may be
established by ICAO from time to time.

It is recognized that ICAO Standards would not replace national regulations
and that national codes of airworthiness containing the full scope and extent of detail
considered necessary by individual States would be required as the basis for the
certification of individual aircraft. Each State is free to develop its own comprehensive
and detailed code of airworthiness or to select, adopt or accept a comprehensive and
detailed code established by another Contracting State.

Annex 8 includes broad standards which define, for application by the national
airworthiness authorities, the minimum basis for the recognition by States of Certificates

429

AIR REGULATIONS

of Airworthiness for the purpose of flight of aircraft of other States into and over their
territories, thereby achieving, among other things, protection of other aircraft, third
parties and property. The level of airworthiness required to be maintained by a national
code is indicated by the broad standards of Annex 8 supplemented, where necessary, by
guidance material provided in ICAO’s Airworthiness Technical Manual (Doc 9760).

Type Certificate. The State of Design, upon receipt of satisfactory evidence
that the aircraft type (or engine type or propeller type, if certificated separately) is in
compliance with the design aspects of the appropriate airworthiness requirements,
shall issue a Type Certificate to define the type design and to signify its approval.

Applicability: The technical standards dealing with certification of aeroplanes
are limited at present to multi-engined aeroplanes of over 5 700 kg maximum
certificated takeoff mass. These standards include requirements related to performance,
flying qualities, structural design and construction, engine and propeller design and
installation, systems and equipment design and installation, and operating Annex 8
is divided into four parts. Part I includes definitions; Part II deals with procedures
for certification and continuing airworthiness of aircraft; Part III includes technical
requirements for the certification of new large aeroplane designs; Part IV deals with
helicopters.

Special Security features: Following the recent events of high jacking and
terrorist acts on board aircraft, special security features have been included in aircraft
design to improve the protection of the aircraft. These include special features in
aircraft systems, identification of a least-risk bomb location, and strengthening of the
cockpit door, ceilings and floors of the cabin crew compartment.

NATIONAL PROVISIONS

Issue of Certificate of airworthiness or Special Certificate of Airworthiness
and Airworthiness Review Certificate.

The owner or operator of an aircraft may apply to the Director General for the
issue of a certificate of airworthiness or a special certificate of airworthiness in respect
of the aircraft or for the validation of a certificate of airworthiness issued elsewhere in
respect of the aircraft.

The Director-General may issue a certificate of airworthiness or special certificate
of airworthiness in respect of an aircraft when—

(a) the applicant furnishes such documents or other evidence relating to the
airworthiness of the aircraft as may be specified by the Director-General; and

(b) the Director-General is satisfied that it is airworthy or in a condition for safe
operation.

Modification and repairs.

A person shall not carry out any modification or repair affecting safety of any
aircraft in respect of which there is a valid certificate of airworthiness unless he has

430

--- Page 222 ---

AIRWORTHINESS OF AIRCRAFT

been required to do so in pursuance of these rules or unless he has obtained the prior
approval of the Director-General.

Suspension or cancellation of certificate of airworthiness or special certificate
of airworthiness and its continued validity.

The certificate of airworthiness or special certificate of airworthiness of an
aircraft shall be deemed to be suspended when an aircraft-

(a) ceases or fails to conform with the requirement of these rules, in respect of
operation, maintenance, modification, repair, replacement, overhaul, process or
inspection, applicable to that aircraft; or

(b) is modified or repaired other wise than in accordance with the provisions of these
rules; or

(c) suffers major damage; or

(a) develops a major defect which would affect the safety of the aircraft or its occupants
in subsequent flights.

If, at any time, the Director-General is satisfied that reasonable doubt exists as
to the safety of an aircraft or as to the safety of the type to which that aircraft belongs,
he may -

(a) suspend or cancel the certificate of airworthiness or special certificate of
airworthiness in respect of the aircraft; or

(b) require the aircraft or an aircraft component or an item of equipment of that
aircraft to undergo such modification, repair, replacement, overhaul, inspection
including flight tests and examination under the supervision of an approved
person as the Director-General may specify, as a condition of the certificate of
airworthiness remaining in force.

(3) An aircraft shall not be flown during any period for which its certificate of
airworthiness or special certificate of airworthiness is suspended or deemed to be
suspended. 2

(4) Where the certificate of airworthiness or the special certificate of airworthiness
of an aircraft is suspended or deemed to be suspended, the Director-General may,
upon an application by the owner or operator, issue a special flight permit.

Flight Manual -

Where a flight manual is required to be kept in relation to an aircraft in accordance
with provisions of these rules, the Director-General shall endorse the certificate of
airworthiness of the aircraft accordingly.

Instruments and Equipment-

Every aircraft shall be fitted and equipped with the instrument and equipment
including radio apparatus and special equipment as may be specified according to the
use and circumstances under which the flight is to be conducted.

431

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

The continuing airworthiness of an aircraft, according to ICAO Annex 8, shall
be determined by:

A) ICAO

B) The operator’s state

C) The state of registry

According to ICAO Annex 8, a certificate of airworthiness shall be renewed or
shall remain valid subject to the:

A) _ Laws of the state of registry and operation

B) Laws of the state of registry

C) Requirements laid down by ICAO

The technical standards dealing with certification of aeroplanes are at present
limited to multi engine aircraft of:

A) Up to 5700Kg maximum certificated take-off and landing mass

B) Over 5700Kg maximum certificated take-off mass

C) Up to 5700Kg maximum certificated take-off mass

When an aircraft has sustained damage, the aircraft shall be allowed to

resume its flight, if

A) _ The state of registry, the state of design and the state of manufacture
consider that the aircraft is still airworthy

B) The state of manufacture informs the state of registry that the damage
sustained is of a nature such that the aircraft is still airworthy

C) The state of registry considers that the damage sustained is of a nature such
that the aircraft is still airworthy

Jet Airways flight is to take off from London to Bosnia. C of A will be as per
the rules of:

A) UK
B) India
C) Bosnia

432

--- Page 223 ---

AIRWORTHINESS OF AIRCRAFT AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

ee
pc [e|eitc} se

433 434

--- Page 224 ---

17

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

(ICAO ANNEX 6,

CAR SECTION 2, AIRWORTHINESS SERIES 'X’, PART VII,
CAR SECTION 8 - AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS SERIES ‘C’ PART |
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS, SERIES '0'", PART Il
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS SERIES '0' PART Iil,
SECTION 7 - FLIGHT CREW STANDARDS, TRAINING AND
LICENSING SERIES ‘J' FDTL, ETC.)

ICAO ANNEX 6, PARTS I, IIT AND ITI (AS APPLICABLE)

Applicability. The Standards and Recommended Practices contained in Annex
6, Part I, shall be applicable to the operation of aeroplanes by operators authorized
to conduct international commercial air transport operations. A second part to Annex
6, dealing exclusively with international general aviation, became applicable in
September 1969. A third part, dealing with all international helicopter operations,
became applicable in November 1986.

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Quality System: An operator shall establish one quality system and designate one
quality manager to monitor compliance with, and adequacy of, procedures required to
ensure safe operational practices and airworthy aeroplanes. Compliance monitoring
must include a feed-back system to the accountable manager to ensure corrective

action as necessary.

Methods of Carriage of Persons

An operator shall take all reasonable measures to ensure that no person is in any
part of an aeroplane in flight which is not a part designed for the accommodation of
persons unless temporary access has been granted by the commander to any part of
the aeroplane:

435

AIR REGULATIONS

e For the purpose of taking action necessary for the safety of the aeroplane or of
any person, animal or goods therein; or

° In which cargo or stores are carried, being a part which is designed to enable a
person to have access thereto while the aeroplane is in flight.

Admission to Flight Deck
An operator must ensure that no person, other than a flight crew member assigned
to a flight, is admitted to, or carried in, the flight deck unless that person is:

¢ An operating crew member;

¢ A representative of the Authority responsible for certification, licensing or
inspection if this is required for the performance of his official duties; or

¢ Permitted by, and carried in accordance with instructions contained in the
Operations Manual.

The final decision regarding the admission to the flight deck shall be the
responsibility of the commander.

Unauthorized carriage. An operator shall take all reasonable measures to
ensure that no person secretes himself or secretes cargo on board an aeroplane.

Portable electronic devices. An operator shall not permit any person to use,
and take all reasonable measures to ensure that no person does use, on board an
aeroplane, a portable electronic device that can adversely affect the performance of the
aeroplane’s systems and equipment.

Documents to be carried

No person in charge of any aircraft shall allow such aircraft to be flown unless the
following valid documents, as applicable (in original or attested copies), are carried on
board the aircraft:

e Certificate of Registration;

¢ Certificate of Airworthiness;

e¢ Airworthiness Review Certificate (ARC);

¢ Adocument attesting Noise Certification of the aeroplane/ helicopter;
¢ Air Operator’s Permit;

e Appropriate Licences for each member of the flight crew;

«  Aeromobile Radio operation Licence for Radio Communication apparatus;
e Journey Log Book or equivalent documents approved by the DGCA;

* Operations Manual;

¢ Minimum Equipment List;

e Flight Manual;

e Cabin Crew Manual;

436

--- Page 225 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

¢ Cockpit and Emergency Check List unless these form part of Flight Manual,
carried on board; Checklists for take off, cruise and landing phases shall be
displayed in the cockpit unless the lists form a part of the Flight Manual,
carried on board.

e  Aeroplane/ Helicopter search procedure checklist;

° Maintenance Release/Certificate to release to service;

° LOPA (Layout of Passenger Arrangement);

° Emergency and Safety Equipment Layout;

° Route guides;

¢ Current and suitable navigation charts/maps for the planned flight route
and all other routes along which it is reasonable to expect that the flight
may be diverted;

° Weight Schedule;

e¢ _ Load and Trim Sheet;

° If carrying passengers, a list of their names and places of embarkation and
destination;

° If carrying cargo, a manifest and detailed declarations of the cargo; and

e  Ifcarrying dangerous goods, a list of such goods. This list must be specifically
brought to the notice of Pilot-in-Command, before the flight.

Note:— Checklists for take off, cruise and landing phases shall be displayed in the
cockpit unless the lists form a part of the Flight Manual, carried on board.

All operators of passenger aircraft shall provide passenger safety information
briefing card at every passenger seat location. Such card shall make use of symbology
to convey the instructions in a clear and concise manner.

Information Retained on Ground
An operator shall ensure that:

At least for the duration of each flight or series of flights;

¢ Information relevant to the flight and appropriate for the type of operation
is preserved on the ground; and

¢ ‘he information is retained until it has been duplicated at the place at
which it will be stored in accordance with rules or, if this is impracticable,

¢ The same information is carried in a fireproof container in the aeroplane.

Power to Inspect

An operator shall ensure that any person authorized by the Authority is permitted
at any time to board and fly in any aeroplane operated in accordance with an AOC
issued by that Authority and to enter and remain on the flight deck provided that the

437

AIR REGULATIONS

commander may refuse access to the flight deck if, in his opinion, the safety of the
aeroplane would thereby be endangered.

Leasing

A description of the operational arrangements for leasing, associated procedures
and management responsibilities.

(a) Dry lease —Is when the aeroplane is operated under the AOC of the lessee.

(b) Wet lease — Is when the aeroplane is operated under the AOC of the lessor.

OPERATOR CERTIFICATION
Air operator Permit/ certificate (AOC):

A Permit /Certificate authorizing an operator to carry out specified commercial
air transport operations.

State of the Operator:

The State in which the operator’s principal place of business is located or, if there
is no such place of business, the operator’s permanent residence.

Contracting States shall recognize as valid an air operator certificate issued by
another Contracting State, provided that the requirements under which the certificate
was issued are at least equal to the applicable Standards specified in Annex 6.

Issue

The issuance of an air operator certificate (AOC) is “dependent upon the operator
demonstrating” to the State that its organization, training policy and programmes,
flight operations, ground handling and maintenance arrangements are adequate
considering the nature and extent of the operations to be conducted. The certification
process involves the State’s evaluation of each operator and a determination that the
operator is capable of conducting safe operations before initial issuance of an AOC or
the addition of any subsequent authorizations to an AOC.

Validity of an AOC

The validity of an AOC shall depend upon the operator maintaining the original
certification standards under the supervision of the State of the Operator. This
supervision requires that a system of continued surveillance be established to ensure
the required standards of operations are maintained.

OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS

Operational Benefit:

Aeroplanes equipped with automatic landing systems, a head-up displays (HUD)
and/or or equivalent displays, enhanced vision systems (EVS), synthetic vision systems
(SVS) and/or combined vision systems (CVS) or any combination of those systems
into a hybrid system, the use of such systems to gain operational benefit for the safe
operation of an aeroplane shall be approved by the State of the Operator.

438

--- Page 226 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

Electronic flight bags (EFBs) :

An electronic information system, comprised of equipment and applications,
for flight crew which allows for storing, updating, displaying and processing of EFB
functions to support flight operations or duties.

Operational contro] and supervision
An operator shall:
° Establish and maintain a method of exercising operational control approved by
the Authority; and
e Exercise operational control over any flight operated under the terms of his AOC.
Use of Air Traffic Services
An operator shall ensure that Air Traffic Services are used for all flights whenever
available.

An aeroplane shall be provided with navigation equipment which will enable it to
proceed:

¢ in accordance with its operational flight plan; and
¢ in accordance with the requirements of air traffic services

Instrument departure and approach procedures

e An operator shall ensure that instrument departure and approach procedures
established by the State in which the aerodrome is located are used.

¢ Acommander may accept an ATC clearance to deviate from a published departure
or arrival route, provided obstacle clearance criteria are observed and full account
is taken of the operating conditions. The final approach must be flown visually or
in accordance with the established instrument approach procedure.

Carriage of Person with Reduced Mobility

No airline shall refuse to carry persons with disability or persons with reduced
mobility and their assistive aids/devices, escorts and guide dogs including their
presence in the cabin, provided such persons or their representatives, at the time of
booking and /or check-in for travel, inform the airlines of their requirement.

Carriage of inadmissible passengers, deportees, or persons in custody

An operator shall establish procedures for the transportation of inadmissible
passengers, deportees or persons in custody to ensure the safety of the aeroplane and
its occupants. The commander must be notified when the above-mentioned persons are
to be carried on board.

Stowage of Baggage and Cargo

The operator shall ensure that all baggage carried onto an aeroplane and taken
into the »assenger cabin is adequately and securely stowed.

439

AIR REGULATIONS

e An operator shall establish procedures.to ensure that only such hand baggage is
taken into the passenger cabin as can be adequately and securely stowed.

e An operator shall establish procedures to ensure that all baggage and cargo
on board, which might cause injury or damage, or obstruct aisles and exits if
displaced, is placed in stowages designed to prevent movement.

Passengers Seating
An operator shall establish procedures to ensure that passengers are seated

where, in the event that an emergency evacuation is required, they may best assist

and not hinder evacuation from the aeroplane.

Security of passenger cabin and galley(s)

e¢ An operator shall establish procedures to ensure that before taxying, take-off and
landing all exits and escape paths are unobstructed.

¢ The commander shall ensure that before take-off and landing, and whenever
deemed necessary in the interest of safety, all equipment and baggage is properly
secured.

Smoking on Board

(a) The commander shall ensure that no person on board is allowed to smoke:
e Whenever deemed necessary in the interest of safety;
¢« While the aeroplane is on the ground unless specifically permitted in

accordance with procedures defined in the Operations Manual;

¢ Outside designated smoking areas, in the aisle(s) and in the toilet(s);
° In cargo compartments and/or other areas where cargo is carried which

is not stored in flame resistant containers or covered by flame resistant
canvas; and

° In those areas of the cabin where oxygen is being supplied.

Take-off Conditions

Before commencing take-off, a commander must satisfy himself that, according
to the information available to him, the weather at the aerodrome and the condition of
the runway intended to be used should not prevent a safe take-off and departure.
Application of take-off minima’s

Before commencing take-off, a commander must satisfy himself that the RVR
or visibility in the takeoff direction of the aeroplane is equal to or better than the
applicable minimum.
Requirements for extended diversion time operations (EDTO).

EDTO may be referred to as ETOPS in some documents.

Unless the operation has been specifically approved by DGCA, an aeroplane with

two or more turbine engines shall not be operated on a route where the diversion time
to an en-route alternate aerodrome from any point on the route, calculated in ISA and

440

--- Page 227 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

still-air conditions at the one-engine-inoperative cruise speed for aeroplanes with two
turbine engines and at the all engines operating cruise speed for aeroplanes with more
than two turbine engines, exceeds a threshold time established for such operations by
DGCA. When the diversion time exceeds the threshold time, the operation is considered
to be an extended diversion time operation (EDTO).

RVSM

For flights in defined portions of airspace where, based on Regional Air N avigation
Agreement, a reduced vertical separation minimum (RVSM) of 300 m (1 000 ft) is
applied between FL 290 and FL 410 inclusive, an aeroplane:

a) shall be provided with equipment which is capable of:
* indicating to the flight crew the flight level being flown;
e automatically maintaining a selected flight level;

* providing an alert to the flight crew when a deviation occurs from the
relected flight level. The threshold for the alert shall not exceed + 90 m (300
t); and

* automatically reporting pressure-altitude;
b) shall be authorized by DGCA for operation in the airspace concerned; and
c) shall demonstrate a vertical navigation performance in accordance with rules.
Note:— An RVSM approval is valid globally on the understanding that any operating
procedures specific to a given region will be stated in the operations manual or
appropriate crew guidance.
ALL-WEATHER OPERATIONS (AWO)

Low Visibility

Low Visibility Procedures (LVP). Procedures applied at an aerodrome for the

purpose of ensuring safe operations during Category II and III approaches and Low
Visibility Take-offs.

Low visibility take-off (LVTO). A term used in relation to flight operations
referring to a take-off on a runway where the RVR is less than 400 m.
Low visibility operations - General operating rules
(a) An operator shall not conduct Category II or III operations unless:

° Each aeroplane concerned is certificated for operations with decision
heights below 200 ft, or no decision height, and equiped in accordance with
equipment accepted by the Authority;

e A suitable system for recording approach and/ or automatic landing success
and failure is established and maintained to monitor the overall safety of
the operation;

« The operations are approved by the Authority;

441

AIR REGULATIONS

¢ ‘The flight crew consists of at least 2 pilots; and
¢ Decision Height is determined by means of a radio altimeter.

(b) An operator shall not conduct low visibility take-offs in less than 400 m RVR
unless approved by DGCA. Scheduled operators may be authorized LVTO minima
of up to 125 m. This requires that a 90 m visual segment shall be available from
the cockpit at the start of the take-off run. Non-scheduled and general aviation
operators shall not conduct take-offs below 500 m RVR.

(c) An operator shall not conduct take-off with RVR/visibility less than standard
Category I conditions of 550m RVR/800 m visibility unless low visibility procedures
are enforced.

Low visibility operations - Training and Qualifications
An operator shall ensure that low visibility training and checking is conducted

in accordance with a detailed syllabus approved by FSD, DGCA and included in the

Operations Manual. ,

Low visibility operations - Operating Procedures
(a) An operator must establish procedures and instructions to be used for Low
Visibility Take Off and Category II and III operations. These procedures must be
included in the Operations Manual and contain the duties of flight crew members
during taxying, take off, approach, flare, landing, rollout and missed approach as
appropriate.
(b) The commander shall satisfy himself that:
¢ The status of the visual and non visual facilities is sufficient prior to
commencing a Low Visibility Take Off or a Category II or III approach;
¢ Appropriate LVPs are in force according to information received from Air
Traffic Services, before commencing a Low Visibility Takeoff or a Category
II or Ill approach; and
¢ The flight crew members are properly qualified and trained prior to
commencing a low visibility take-off (in an RVR of less than 400 m), Category
II or HI approach. ;
¢ Full thrust take off rating is to be used for LVTO. Supervised take off and
landing is not permitted during CAT II/III operations or LVTO.
Low visibility Operations - Minimum Equipment
An operator must include in the Operations Manual the minimum equipment that
has to be serviceable at the commencement of a Low Visibility Takeoff or a Category II
or III approach in accordance with the AFM or other approved document. The following
aircraft systems equipment listed as applicable/installed which are critical for LVTO
Operations shall be fully serviceable; Windshield wipers (where fitted) for both PIC

_ and Co-pilot, Window heat system for all heated cockpit windows, Anti-skid system

and Thrust reversers for all engines.

A
{
{

442

--- Page 228 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

Aerodrome Operating Minima’s - Landing

To enable Scheduled, Non-scheduled and General Aviation Operators to operate
safely at an aerodrome under limiting weather conditions, Aerodrome Operating
Minima (AOM) are established. There are two sets of Aerodrome Operating Minima
for application by Indian operators and at Indian aerodromes; Normal Aerodrome
Operating Minima and Restricted Aerodrome Operating Minima.

Normal AOM is to be applied by scheduled and general aviation operators.

Restricted AOM consists of additives of height and visibility to the normal
AOM.

Non-scheduled and general aviation operators fulfilling the specified conditions
for normal AOM will be given approval for specific crew, aeroplane and type of approach
operations.

Normal Aerodrome Operating Minima shall be calculated based on the latest
information of airport facilities, procedures and OCAs. Operators shall ensure that

only information promulgated by the Airports Authority of India (AAI) through the
Aeronautical Information Service is used for calculation of AOM at civil and defence

aerodromes.
Restricted Aerodrome Operating Minima shall be based on additives applied
to the Normal AOM as below;
Restricted AOM = Normal AOM DA(H)/MDA (H) + 100 ft and normal AOM
Visibility/RVR + 400 m .
Commencement and Continuation of Approach (Approach Ban Policy).

The PIC shall not commence an instrument approach if the reported RVR/Visibility
is below the applicable minimum. If, after commencing an instrument approach, the
reported RVR/Visibility falls below the applicable minimum, the approach shall not be
continued:

(a) below 1 000 ft above the aerodrome; or

(b) into the final approach segment.

Where the RVR is not available, RVR values may be derived by converting the
reported visibility.

If, after entering the final approach segment or descending below 1000 ft above the
aerodrome elevation, the reported RVR/visibility falls below the applicable minimum,
the approach may be continued to DA/H or MDA/H.

The approach may be continued below DA/H or MDA/H and the landing may be
completed provided that the required visual reference is established at the DA/H or
MDA/H and is maintained.

The touch-down zone RVR is always controlling. If reported and relevant, the
mid-point and stop-end RVR are also controlling. The minimum RVR value for the
mid-point is 125 m or the RVR required for the touch-down zone if less, and 50 m for

443

AIR REGULATIONS

the stop-end. For aeroplanes equipped with a stop-end (roll-out) guidance or control
system, the minimum RVR value for the mid-point is 50 m. Note: “Relevant”, in this
context, means that part of the runway used during the high speed phase of the landing
down to a speed of approximately 60 knots.

VFR Operating Minima

An operator is to ensure that VFR flights are conducted in accordance with the
visual flight rules and in VMC. Special VFR flights are not permitted for commercial
air transport aeroplanes.

INSTRUMENT AND SAFETY EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS

Circuit Protection Devices

An operator shall not operate an aeroplane in which fuses are used unless there
are spare fuses available for use in flight equal to at least 10% of the number of fuses
of each rating or three of each rating whichever is the greater.

Windshield Wipers

An operator shall not operate an aeroplane with a maximum certificated take-
off mass of more than 5,700 kg unless it is equipped at each pilot station with a
windshield wiper or equivalent means to maintain a clear portion of the windshield
during precipitation.

Airborne Weather Radar Equipment

Pressurised aeroplanes when carrying passengers, should be equipped with
operative weather radar whenever such aeroplane are operated in areas where
thunderstorms or other potentially hazardous weather conditions regarded as
detectable with airborne weather radar may be expected to exist along the route either
at night or under Instrument Meteorological Conditions.

Flight recorders.

“Crash protected flight recorders comprise one or more of the following systems: a
flight data recorder (FDR), a cockpit voice recorder (CVR), an airborne image recorder
(AIR) and/or a data link recorder (DLR). Image and data link information may be
recorded on either the CVR or the FDR. Lightweight flight recorders comprise one or
more of the following systems: an aircraft data recording system (ADRS), a cockpit
audio recording system (CARS), an airborne image recording system (AIRS) and/or a
data link recording system (DLRS). Image and data link information may be recorded
on either the CARS or the ADRS.

All aeroplanes of a maximum certificated take-off mass of over 15 000 kg which
are required to be equipped with both a CVR and an FDR, shall be equipped with two
combination recorders (FDR/CVR). One recorder shall be located as close to the cockpit
as practicable and the other recorder located as far aft as practicable.

All FDRs shall be capable of retaining the information recorded during at least
the last 25 hours of their operation.CVRs and Data link recorders shall be capable of
retaining the information recorded during at least the last two hours of their operation.

444

--- Page 229 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

Pressure Altitude:
All aeroplanes shall be equipped with a data source that provides pressure
altitude information with a resolution of 7.62 m (25 ft), or better.

Microphones:
All flight crew members required to be on flight deck duty shall communicate
through boom or throat microphones below the transition level/altitude.

Turbo-jet aeroplanes — forward-looking wind shear warning system and
GPWS:

All turbo-jet aeroplanes of a maximum certificated take-off mass in excess of 5
700 kg or authorized to carry more than nine passengers should be equipped with a
forward-looking wind shear warning system and a ground proximity warning system
which has a forward looking terrain avoidance function.

ACAS II:

All turbine-engined aeroplanes of a maximum certificated take-off mass in excess of
5,700 kg or authorized to carry more than 19 passengers shall be equipped with an
airborne collision avoidance system (ACAS ID).

Security of the flight crew compartment:

All passenger-carrying aeroplanes of a maximum certificated take-off mass in
excess of 45,500 kg or with a passenger seating capacity greater than 60 shall be
equipped with an approved flight crew compartment door that is designed to resist
penetration by small arms fire and grenade shrapnel, and to resist forcible intrusions
by unauthorized persons. This door shall be capable of being locked and unlocked from
either pilot’s station.

First Aid Kits
One or more first-aid kits as per the following table is carried for the use of cabin

crew in managing incidents of ill health.

0-100
200-299

Emergency Medical Kit
Medical supplies should comprise:

° For aeroplanes required to carry cabin crew as part of the operating crew,
one universal precaution kit (two for aeroplanes authorized to carry more

445

AIR REGULATIONS

than 250 passengers) for the use of cabin crew members in managing incidents
of ill health associated with a case of suspected communicable disease, or in
the case of illness involving contact with body fluids; and

¢ For aeroplanes authorized to carry more than 100 passengers, on a sector
length of more than two hours, a medical kit, for the use of medical doctors
or other qualified persons in treating in-flight medical emergencies.

Oxygen Supply
Note:— Approximate altitudes in the Standard Atmosphere corresponding to the values
of absolute pressure used in the text are as follows:

Absolute Pressure
700 hPa 3 000 10 000
620 hPa 4.000 13 000

376 hPa 7600 25 000

A flight to be operated at flight altitude at which the atmospheric pressure in
personnel compartments will be less than 700hPa shall not be commenced unless
sufficient stored breathing oxygen is carried to supply:

a) allcrew members and 10% passengers for any period in excess of 30 minutes that
the pressure in the compartment occupied by them will be between 700 hPa and
620 hPa; and

b) the crew and passengers for any period that the atmospheric pressure in
compartments occupied by them will be less than 620 hPa.

A flight to be operated with a pressurised aeroplane shall not be commenced
unless a sufficient quantity of stored breathing oxygen is carried to supply all the crew
members and passengers as is appropriate to the circumstances of the flight being
undertaken, in the event of loss of pressurisation, for any period that the atmospheric
pressure in any compartment occupied by them would be less than 700 hPa. In addition,
when an aeroplane is operated at flight altitudes at which the atmospheric pressure is
less than 376 hPa, or which, if operated at flight altitudes at the atmospheric pressure
is more than 376 hPa and cannot descend safely within four minutes to a flight altitude
at which the atmospheric pressure is equal to 620 hPa, there shall be no less than a
10-minute supply for the occupants of the passenger compartment.

Pressurised aeroplanes which are intended to be operated at flight altitude at
which the atmospheric pressure would be less than 376 hPa., shall be equipped with
the device to provide positive warning to the flight crew of any dangerous loss of
pressurisation.

446

--- Page 230 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

Crew Protective Breathing Equipment

An operator shall not operate a pressurized aeroplane or, an unpressurised
aeroplane with a maximum certificated take-off mass exceeding 5 700 kg or having a
maximum approved seating configuration of more than 19 seats unless:

(1) It has equipment to protect the eyes, nose and mouth of each flight crew member
while on flight deck duty and to provide oxygen for a period of not less than 15
minutes. The supply for Protective Breathing Equipment (PBE) may be provided
by the supplemental oxygen required . In addition, when the flight crew is more
than one and a cabin crew member is not carried, portable PBE must be carried to
protect the eyes, nose and mouth of one member of the flight crew and to provide
breathing gas for a period of not less than 15 minutes; and

(2) Ithas sufficient portable PBE to protect the eyes, nose and mouth of all required
cabin crew members and to provide breathing gas for a period of not less than 15

minutes.
MINIMUM FUEL REQUIREMENTS

All Aeroplanes (except Helicopters)
The amount of usable fuel to be carried shall, as a minimum, be based on the
following data:

Current aeroplane-specific data derived from a fuel consumption monitoring
system, if available; or, if current aeroplane-specific data are not available, data
provided by the aeroplane manufacturer; and the operating conditions for the planned
flight including anticipated aeroplane mass; Notices to Airmen; current meteorological
reports or a combination of current reports and forecasts; air traffic services procedures,
restrictions and anticipated delays; and the effects of deferred maintenance items and/
or configuration deviations.

The pre-flight calculation of usable fuel required shall include:

a) taxi fuel, which shall be the amount of fuel expected to be consumed before
take-off taking into account local conditions at the departure aerodrome and
auxiliary power unit (APU) fuel consumption;

b) trip fuel, which shall be the amount of fuel required to enable the aeroplane
to fly from take-off or the point of in-flight re-planning, until landing at the
destination aerodrome taking into account the operating conditions.

c) contingency fuel, which shall be the amount of fuel required to compensate
for unforeseen factors. It shall be 5 per cent of the planned trip fuel or of
the fuel required from the point of in-flight re-planning based on the
consumption rate used to plan the trip fuel but, in any case, shall not be
lower than the amount required to fly for five minutes at holding speed at
450 m (1 500 ft) above the destination aerodrome in standard conditions;

Note. -- Unforeseen factors are those which could have an influence on the fuel consumption
to the destination aerodrome, such as deviations of an individual aeroplane from the

447

AIR REGULATIONS

expected fuel consumption data, deviations from forecast meteorological conditions,
extended delays and deviations from planned routings and/or cruising levels.

dad) destination alternate fuel, which shall be:
1) where a destination alternate aerodrome is required, the amount
of fuel required to enable the aeroplane to:

i) perform a missed approach at the destination aerodrome;

ii) climb to the expected cruising altitude;

iii) fly the expected routing;

iv) descend to the point where the expected approach is initiated; and

v) conduct the approach and landing at the destination alternate
aerodrome; or

2) where two destination alternate aerodromes are required, the
amount of fuel, as calculated, required to enable the aeroplane to
proceed to the destination alternate aerodrome which requires the
greater amount of alternate fuel; or

3) where a flight is operated without a destination alternate
aerodrome, the amount of fuel required to enable the aeroplane to fly
for 15 minutes at holding speed at 450 m (1 500 ft) above destination
aerodrome elevation in standard conditions; or

4) where the aerodrome of intended landing is an isolated aerodrome:

vi) for a reciprocating engine aeroplane, the amount of fuel required
to fly for 45 minutes plus 15 per cent of the flight time planned
to be spent at cruising level, including final reserve fuel, or two
hours, whichever is less; or

vii) for a turbine-engine aeroplane, the amount of fuel required to fly
for two hours at normal cruise consumption above the destination
aerodrome, including final reserve fuel;

e) final reserve fuel, which shall be the amoynt of fuel calculated using the
estimated mass on arrival at the destination alternate aerodrome, or the
destination aerodrome when no destination alternate aerodrome is required:

5) for a reciprocating engine aeroplane, the amount of fuel required
to fly for 45 minutes, under speed and altitude conditions specified by
the State of the Operator; or

6) for a turbine-engine aeroplane, the amount of fuel required to fly
for 30 minutes at holding speed at 450 m (1 500 ft) above aerodrome
elevation in standard conditions;

448

--- Page 231 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

f) additional fuel, which shall be the supplementary amount of fuel required
if the minimum fuel calculated is not sufficient to:

7) allow the aeroplane to descend as necessary and proceed to an alternate
aerodrome in the event of engine failure or loss of pressurization,
whichever requires the greater amount of fuel based on the assumption
that such a failure occurs at the most critical point along the route;
viii) fly for 15 minutes at holding speed at 450 m (1 500 ft) above

aerodrome elevation in standard conditions; and

ix) make an approach and landing;

8) allow an aeroplane engaged in EDTO to comply with the EDTO critical
fuel scenario as established by the State of the Operator;
Extended diversion time operations (EDTO).
Any operation by an aeroplane with two or more turbine engines where the
diversion time to an en-route alternate aerodrome is greater than the threshold time
established by the State of the Operator.

9) meet additional requirements not covered above;

g) discretionary fuel, which shall be the extra amount of fuel to be carried at
the discretion of the pilot-in-command.

Hand Fire Extinguishers

Portable fire extinguishers provided shall be of a type which, when discharged,
will not cause dangerous contamination of the air within the aeroplane. At least one
shall be located in:

¢ the pilot's compartment; and

° each passenger compartment that is separate from the pilot's compartment and
that is not readily accessible to the flight crew.

Any portable fire extinguisher so fitted in accordance with the Certificate of
Airworthiness of the aeroplane may count as one prescribed.

Crash Axes and Crowbars

An operator shall not operate an aeroplane with a maximum certificated take-
off mass exceeding 5 700 kg or having a maximum approved passenger seating
configuration of more than 9 seats unless it is equipped with at least one crash axe
or crowbar located on the flight deck. If the maximum approved passenger seating
configuration is more than 200 an additional crash axe or crowbar must be carried and
located in or near the most rearward galley area.

Marking of break-in points

Areas of the fuselage suitable for break-in by rescue crews in emergency are
marked on an aeroplane. The colour of the markings shall be red or yellow, and if
necessary they shall be outlined in white to contrast with the background.

449

AIR REGULATIONS

Means for Emergency Evacuation

An operator shall, for each type of aeroplane, assign to all flight crew members the
necessary functions they are to perform in an emergency or in a situation requiring
emergency evacuation. Annual training in accomplishing these functions shall be
contained in the operator’s training programme and shall include instruction in the
use of all emergency and lifesaving equipment required to be carried, and drills in the
emergency evacuation of the aeroplane.

Megaphones

An operator shall not operate an aeroplane with a maximum approved passenger
seating configuration of more than 60 and carrying one or more passengers unless it is
equipped with portable battery-powered megaphones readily accessible for use by crew
members during an emergency evacuation, to the following scales:

Passenger Seating

Number of Megaphones
Configuration Required

ee

Emergency Lightings

An operator shall not operate a passenger carrying aeroplane which has a
maximum approved passenger seating configuration of more than 9 unless it is
provided with an emergency lighting system having an independent power supply to
facilitate the evacuation of the aeroplane.

Automatic Emergency Locator Transmitter
All aeroplanes shall carry an automatic ELT.

All aeroplanes authorized to carry more than 19 passengers shall be equipped
with at least two ELTs, one of which shall be automatic.

Life Jackets

An operator shall ensure that passengers are made familiar with the location and use
of:

° seat belts;

* emergency exits;

° life jackets, if the carriage of life jackets is prescribed;

° oxygen dispensing equipment, if the provision of oxygen for the use of passengers
is prescribed; and

¢ other emergency equipment provided for individual use including passenger
emergency briefing card.

450

--- Page 232 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

Life rafts and survival ELTs for extended over-water flights

On overwater flights, an operator shall not operate an aeroplane at a distance
away from land, which is suitable for making an emergency landing, sufficient
life-rafts to carry all persons on board. Unless excess rafts of enough capacity are
provided, the buoyancy and seating capacity beyond the rated capacity of the rafts
must accommodate all occupants of the aeroplane in the event of a loss of one raft of
the largest rated capacity. The life-rafts shall be equipped with:

¢ Asurvivor locator light; and

e Life saving equipment including means of sustaining life as appropriate to the
flight to be undertaken and at least two survival Emergency Locator Transmitters
(ELT(S)) capable of transmitting on the distress frequencies.

Survival Equipment
Operators shall at all times have available for immediate communication to

rescue coordination centers, lists containing information on the emergency and survival
equipment carried on board any of their aeroplanes engaged in international air
navigation. The information shall include, as applicable, the number, colour and type
of life rafts and pyrotechnics, details of emergency medical supplies, water supplies
and the type and frequencies of the emergency portable radio equipment.

COMMUNICATION AND NAVIGATION EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Communication Equipment
An aeroplane shall be provided with radio communication equipment capable of:
* conducting two-way communication for aerodrome control purposes;
* — receiving meteorological information at any time during flight; and

* conducting two-way communication at any time during flight with at least one
aeronautical station and with such other aeronautical stations and on such
frequencies as may be prescribed by the appropriate authority.

The radio communication equipment shall provide for communications on the
aeronautical emergency frequency 121.5 MHz.

For flights in defined portions of airspace or on routes where an RCP type has
been prescribed, an aeroplane shall:

* be provided with communication equipment which will enable it to operate in
accordance with the prescribed RCP type(s); and

¢ be authorized by the State of the Operator for operations in such airspace.
Navigation Equipment

An aeroplane shall be provided with navigation equipment which will enable it to
proceed:

* in accordance with its operational flight plan; and
e  inaccordance with the requirements of air traffic services; except when navigation

451

AIR REGULATIONS

for flights under the visual flight rules is accomplished by visual reference to
landmarks.

For operations where a navigation specification for PBN has been prescribed, an
aeroplane shall:

° be provided with navigation equipment which will enable it to operate in
accordance with the prescribed navigation specification(s); and

. be authorized by DGCA for operations in such operations.

For flights in defined portions of airspace where based on Regional Air Navigation
agreement, minimum navigation performance specifications (MNPS) are
prescribed, an aeroplane shall be provided with navigation equipment which:

~- continuously provides indications to the flight crew of adherences to or
departures from track to the required degree of accuracy at any point along
with the track; and

- has been authorised by DGCA for MNPS operations concerned.
Radio Equipment

Aeroplane when operated across land areas which may be designated by AAI as
areas in which search and rescues would be especially difficult, shall be equipped with
at least one survival radio equipment, stowed so as to facilitate its ready use in an
emergency which operates on VHF. The equipment shall be portable, not dependent
for operation upon the aircraft power supply and capable of being operated away from
the aircraft by unskilled persons. Aeroplane shall also be equipped with such signaling
devices and life-saving equipment (including means of sustaining life), as may be
appropriate to the area over flown.

Audio Selector Panel

An operator shall not operate an aeroplane under IFR unless it is equipped with
an audio selector panel accessible to each required flight crew member.

FLIGHT CREW

Flight and Duty Time Limitations and Rest Requirements

CIVIL AVIATION REQUIREMENT SECTION 7- FLIGHT CREW STANDARDS
TRAINING AND LICENSING SERIES J in three parts prescribes the Maximum
Limits or Flight Time, Flight Duty Period, Duty Period and Minimum Rest Period
applicable to all flight crew and cabin crew of Scheduled, Non Scheduled, general
aviation and Scheduled Commuter Air Transport Services.

Cabin Crew Member.

Cabin Crew member are crew who perform duties in the interest of safety of
passengers, duties assigned by the operator and the pilot-in-command of the aircraft
but who shall not act as flight crew member.

452

--- Page 233 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

Flight Crew Member.

A licensed crew member charged with duties essential to the operation of an
aircraft during a flight duty period.

Scheduled Commuter Operators.

Are operators permitted to operate aircraft weighing upto 40,000 kg. They are
permitted to operate commercial flights between two or more local destinations except
Category I cities which include Mumbai Int'l, Kolkata Int'l, Delhi Int'l, Bangalore Int'l,
Hyderabad Int'l, Thiruvananthapuram, and Chennai.

Duty Period, Flight Duty Period, Flight Time Limitations and
Prescribed Rest Periods for Flight crew engaged in
Scheduled Air Transport Operations
In subsequent paras, high lights of SERIES J PART ITI ISSUE ITI, DATED 24TH
APRIL 2019 dealing exclusively with Scheduled Air Transport Operations will be
covered.

DEFINITIONS

Acclimatized. It means a state in which a crew member’s circadian biological
clock is synchronised to the time zone where the crew member is. A crew member is
considered to be acclimatized to a 3 hour wide time zone surrounding the local time at
the point of departure. When the local time at the place where a flight duty commences
(departure time zone) differs by more than 3 hours from the local time at the place
where the next duty starts, the crew member, for the calculation of the maximum daily
flight duty period, is considered to be acclimatized to the departure time zone for the
first 48 hour. After 48 hours, the crew member shall be considered acclimatized to the
local time where the crew member starts his/her next duty.

Accommodation. Means, for the purpose of standby and split duty, a quiet
and comfortable place not open to the public, with the ability to control light and
temperature, equipped with adequate furniture that provides a crew member with the
possibility to sleep, with enough capacity to accommodate all crew members present at
the same time and with access to food and drink.

Suitable Accommodation. Means, for the purpose of standby, split duty and
rest, a separate room for each for crew member located in a quiet environment and
equipped with a bed, which is sufficiently ventilated, has a device for regulating
temperature and light intensity, and access to food and drink.

Augmented Flight Crew. Means, a flight crew, which comprises more than the
minimum number required to operate the aircraft, allowing each flight crew member to
leave the assigned post, for the purpose of in-flight rest, and to be replaced by another
flight crew member with equal or higher qualification.

Duty. Any task that flight crew members are required by the operator to perform,
including, for example, flight duty, administrative work, training, positioning and

453

AIR REGULATIONS

standby when it is likely to induce fatigue.

Duty Period. A period which starts when a flight crew member is required by an
operator to report for, or to commence a duty and ends when that person is free from
all duties.

Flight Duty Period. A period which is intended to cover continuous period
of duty that always includes a flight or series of flight for a flight crew member. It
commences when a flight crew member is required to report for duty and finishes at
engine(s) off at the end of the last flight on which he/she is a flight crew member.

Flight Time. The total time from the moment an aeroplane first moves for the
purpose of taking off until the moment it finally comes to rest at the end of the flight.

Note: “Flight time” as defined here is synonymous with the term “block-to-block”
time or “chocks-to-chocks” time in general usage, which is measured from the time an
aeroplane first moves for the purpose of takeoff until it finally stops at the end of the
flight.

Mixed Duty. When a crew member is required to report for a duty in advance
of the stipulated reporting time, for a scheduled flight or series of flight, to carry out
a duty at the behest of Operator, the time spent on that duty shall be part of the
subsequent FDP.

Fatigue. A physiological state of reduced mental or physical performance
capability resulting from sleep loss or, extended wakefulness, circadian phase, or
workload (mental and/or physical activity) that can impair a crew member’s alertness
and ability to safely operate an aircraft or perform safety related duties.

Home Base. The location nominated by the Operator, having high degree of
permanence from which the crew member normally starts and ends a flight duty or a
series of flight duty periods.

Temporary Home Base. The place of posting by the operator where the crew
operates and starts a series of Duty Cycles, and which is not the same as Home Base.

Local Day. Means a 24-hour period, commencing at 00:00 local time.

Local Night, A period of 8 hours falling between 2200 hours and 0800 hours local
time.

Lurg Range (LR). Continuous non-stop flights involving any sector having a
concinuous flight time of over 12 hrs and up to 14 hrs and Flight duty periods upto
18 hr-.

Night Duty. Any Duty Period encroaching upon any portion of the time period
between 0000 hrs and 0500 hrs in the time zone to which the crew is acclimatized.

Operating Crew Member. Is a crew member, carrying out duties in an aircraft,
during a sector. /

Positioning. The transferring of a non-operating flight crew member from place

454

--- Page 234 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

to place at the behest of the operator.
Note: “Positioning” as here defined is synonymous with the term “Deadheading”.

Reporting Time. The time at which flight crew member is required by an
operator to report for duty.

Rest Period. A continuous, uninterrupted anddefined period of time, subsequent
to or prior to duty, during which a flight crew member is free from all duties, standby
and reserve.

Rest Facility. Means a bunk or seat with leg and foot support suitable for crew
members’ sleeping on board an aircraft.

Roster. A list provided by an operator of the times when a flight crew member is
required to undertake duties.

Note: “Roster” as here defined is synonymous with “Schedule”, “Line of Time”,
“Pattern”, and “Rotation”.

Split Duty (Break). A period free of all duties, which counts as duty, being less
than a rest period.

Break. Means a period of time within a flight duty period, shorter than a rest
period, counting as duty and during which a crew member is free of all tasks.

Standby. It is a defined period of time during which a flight crew member is
required by the operator to be available to receive an assignment for a specific duty
without an intervening rest period.

Sector. Means the segment of a Flight Duty Period (FDP) between an aircraft
first moving for the purpose of taking off until it comes to rest after landing on the
designated parking position.

Time Zone. Means a defined region of the earth with a uniform local time which
differs by one hour, or by part of one hour from the uniform local time of an adjoining
region of the earth, irrespective of season.

Training Flights. Flights for the purpose of Base Training, Familiarization,
Conducting Aircraft Training and Checks (Skill Test/IR/PPC).

Unforeseen Operational Circumstance. An unplanned event, such as
unforeseen weather, natural calamity, medical emergency, national requirement
for relief and rescue operations (mission oriented), equipment malfunction, runway
closure, passenger, aircraft security, etc., that is beyond the control of the operator.

Ultra Long Range (ULR) Operations. Continuous non-stop flights between a
specific city pair involving any sector having a flight time of over 14 hrs and flight duty
periods up to 22 hrs at any time during a calendar year taking into account the mean
and seasonal wind changes. The ULR operations apply to both sectors of a city pair.

In-flight Rest Period. Means a period of time with in a flight duty time, which
is to give a crew member an opportunity to rest before recommencing duty.

455

AIR REGULATIONS

Window Of Circadian Low (WOCL). WOCL means a period between 0200h
and 0600h in the time zone to which a crew member is acclimatized. This estimate
of the window is calculated from scientific data on the circadian low of performance,
alertness, subject report (i.e. peak fatigue) and body temperature.

OPERATOR’S RESPONSIBILITY

Every operator shall establish a scheme for complying with the limitations for
Flight Time, Flight Duty Periods, Duty Periods and Rest Periods specified in this CAR
in respect of flight crew members.

Each Operator shall prepare the Flight Crew Roster sufficiently in advance.
Roster should be published at least for a 7 day period and the weekly rest shall be
printed on the published roster.

Every operator shall assign a Home Base to each flight crew member.
RESPONSIBILITY OF FLIGHT CREW MEMBER

No flight crew member may accept an assignment, which shall exceed the
prescribed limitation.

; Flight crew members shall make best use of facilities and opportunities that are
available or provided for rest and for the consumption of meals, and shall plan and use
rest periods to ensure that they are fully rested.

A flight crew member shall not perform flight crew duties on a flight if it is known
or suspected that the flight crew member is fatigued to the extent that the safety of
flight may be adversely affected.

FLIGHT TIMEAND FLIGHT DUTY PERIOD LIMITS: TWO PILOT OPERATION

The maximum flight time and maximum flight duty period during any 24 hrs are
indicated in the following Table.

accion Flight Maximum _ Flight | Maximum No.

456

--- Page 235 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

FLIGHT TIME AND FLIGHT DUTY PERIOD LIMITS : AUGMENTED CREW

The maximum flight time and maximum flight duty period during any 24 hrs are
indicated in the following Table.

Maximum No.
of Landings

(*) For ULR operations approvals to be sought from DGCA on case-to-case basis for
specific city pairs and the departure windows of the flights.

(#) When the FDP starts in the WOCL, the maximum FDP stated in the Tables shall
be reduced by 100% of its encroachment up to a maximum of 2 hours. When the
FDP ends in or fully encompasses the WOCL, the maximum FDP stated in the
table shall be reduced by 50% of its encroachment.

(**) The maximum flight duty period may be extended for three crew operation by 2
hrs if rest in seat is available and 3 hrs in case of rest in bunk.

MAXIMUM CUMULATIVE FLIGHT TIME AND DUTY PERIOD
LIMITATIONS

Maximum Cumulative
| Flight Time Limitations
8.1 | In 7 consecutive days

22] In 14 consecutive days
/8.3 | In 28 consecutive days
In 90 consecutive day

com In 365 consecutive days i000

Time Limitation

457

AIR REGULATIONS

UNFORSEEN OPERATIONAL CIRUMSTANCES

Flight Time’, ‘Flight Duty Period’ and “landing” may be extended due to unforeseen
operational circumstances as follows:

a) Flight Time by maximum of 11/2 hours.

b) FDP by maximum of 3 hours. \

c) Only one extra landing may be carried out in the event of a diversion to complete
the flight, including a consecutive night for completion of the flight.

d) Theabove is subject to a cumulative limit of maximum of 4.30 hours (Flight Time),
maximum of 9 hrs (FDP) and 02 landings during any period of 28 consecutive
days.

e) Whenever the Flight duty period or flight time gets extended, the rest period
shall be pro-rata increased by twice the amount of extended time of Flight duty
period. i

f) Extension of the maximum basic FDP shall not be combined with split duty in the
same duty period.

g) Incase of not utilizing any flight time after commencement of FDP (Reporting)
the crew can be utilized after a minimum of twice the time period spent after
reporting subject to a minimum limit of 8 hours of rest.

PIC in consultation with other Flight Crew members will convey their willingness
or consent to the Head of Operations for operating the flight.
Records

Records shall be kept for 18 months of the duties performed and the rest periods
provided so as to facilitate inspection by the operator’s authorized personnel and
surveillance/audit by DGCA officers. The records may be made available to flight crew
on request.

458

--- Page 236 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

QUESTIONS

Flight Duty Period and Flight Time Limit for 2 crew international scheduled
flight is hrs and landing.

A)  10hrs and 1 landings

B) Three hrs and 9 landings

C)  Q9hrs and 3 landings at night

Route guides are required to be carried in

A) All aircraft

B) Al private aircraft

C) Aircraft involved in scheduled transport services

The duty time of the trainee pilot:

A) _ Is calculated as per the Flight Time And Flight Duty Period Limit
B) Is not affected by the Flight Duty Period and Flight Time Limit
C) Is the time calculated from take off to landing

A pilot can fly in 30 consecutive days
A) 100 hrs PIC & 50 hrs as Co pilot
B) 100 hrs PIC & 30 hrs as Co pilot
C) 120 hrs PIC & 20 hrs as Co pilot

Flight Manual is to be carried by
A) _ All aircraft

B) Scheduled aircraft only

C) If C ofAstates so

A pvt. Aircraft from Chennai to Colombo is required to carry on board.

A) Journey log book.
‘“B) Route Guide
C) All of the above

The maximum duty time limit per day extension for a scheduled flight is

_ AY 1.5 hrs
 B) 2hrs
C) 3hrs

459

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

ATR REGULATIONS

Max flying hours for a flight crew in one year is:

A) 200hrs.
B) 1000 hrs
C) 1200 hrs

With regard to flight time limitations, “flight time “means:

A) _ The total time from when an aircraft first moves under its own power for the
purpose of taking off until it comes to rest after the flight

B) The time between take-off and landing

C) The time between an aircraft starting to move and coming to a complete stop
plus one and a haif hours

The maximum permitted flight time for flight crew is :
A) 69 hours in the 27days prior to the flight

B) 100 hours in the 27days before the current flight
C) 1000 hours in 365 consecutive days

A flight to be operated with a pressurized aeroplane will not be commenced

unless a sufficient quantity of stored breathing oxygen is carried to supply;

A) All crew members

B) All crew members and passengers

C) All crew members and passengers, when the atmospheric pressure in any
compartment occupied by them is less then 700 hPa

Emergency and cockpit check list is to be carried by
A) Allalc

B) Scheduled a/c

C) None scheduled a/c

Number of first aid kits to be carried on board an aircraft carrying 250
passengers is:

A) 1
B) 2
Cc) 3

No person, other than a flight crew member assigned to a flight, is admitted to,
or carried in, the flight deck unless that person is:

A) Asecurity staff

B) Anoperating crew member

C) Representative of the Operator

460

--- Page 237 ---

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

Low Visibility Procedures (LVP) procedures are applied at an aerodrome for the
purpose of ensuring safe operations during

A) Category I, Category II and Ill approaches

B) Low Visibility Take-offs

C) Severe thunder showers

For an unplanned event, such as unforecast weather, equipment malfunction,
or air traffic delay that is beyond the control of the operator ‘Flight Time’ and
‘Flight Duty Period’ may be extended as follows:

A) _ Flight Time by maximum of 2 hours and FDP by maximum of 4 hours subject to
a cumulative limit of maximum of 8 hours and maximum of 16 hours respectively
in 30 consecutive days.

B) — Flight Time by maximum of 4 hours and FDP by maximum of 8 hours.

C) Flight Time by maximum of 1% hours and FDP by maximum of 3 hours

Minimum trip fuel required shall be the amount of fuel required to enable the

aeroplane to fly from take-off or the point of in-flight re-planning,

A) until landing at the destination aerodrome taking into account the operating
conditions.

B) until overhead at the destination aerodrome taking into account the operating
conditions.

C) until over head at the destination aerodrome taking into account the fuel
required to go to a diversion.

Scheduled operators may be authorized LVTO minima of up to:

A) 400m
B) 200m
C) 125m

If, after commencing an instrument approach, the reported RVR/Visibility falls
below the applicable minimum, the approach shall not be continued:

A) below MDA/DA, as applicable

B) below AOM published for the aerodrome.

C) below 1 000 ft above the aerodrome.

461

20.

21,

AIR REGULATIONS

All FDRs shall be capable of retaining the information recorded during at least
the last __—shhours of their operation. CVRs atleast hrs and Data link
recorders shall be capable of retaining the information recorded during at least
the last___ hours of their operation.

A)  24,2,4
B)  25,2,2
C)  25,3,2

Filed minima is 300 m. Touch down zone RVR is 400 m. Relevant mid-point RVR
is 100m and stop-end RVR 300m. The runway is:

A) Below minima

B) With in minima

C) Equal to minima.

462

--- Page 238 ---

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

st t2{3 {4 [5s [e6}7]{sfe) ola] 2 [1s 14
ATA TAtSe laAle{ci|eljaici]cla jc jel

(15 | 16 [17 | 18 | 49 | 20] 21 |

Bie jatcic| sia |

463 464

--- Page 239 ---

138

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL
PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS
(GENERAL ASPECTS)

Minimum Equipment List

The operator shall include in the Operations Manual a minimum equipment list
(MEL), approved by the DGCA which will enable the pilot-in-command to determine
whether a flight may be commenced or continued from any intermediate stop should
any instrument, equipment or system become inoperative.

DGCA may require the minimum equipment list of an operator approved to
specify the operating equipment required for night and/or IMC operations, and for
day/VMC operations.

The Master Minimum Equipment List (MMEL) defines the equipment on which
certain in-flight failures can be allowed and the conditions under which this allowance
cone accepted. This MMEL is drawn up by the manufacturer and approved by the

Aeroplane Flight Manual (AFM);

Aeroplanes shall be operated in accordance with the provisions of the Flight
Manual approved by the State of design.

An aeroplane shall be operated in compliance with the terms of its certificate of
airworthiness and within the approved operating limitations contained in its flight
manual.

Account shall be taken of all factors that significantly affect the performance of
the aeroplane, (including, but not limited to: the mass of the aeroplane, the operating
procedures, the pressure-altitude appropriate to the elevation of the aerodrome, the
ambient temperature, the wind, the runway slope, and surface conditions of runway
Le., presence of snow, slush, water, and/or ice; for landplanes, water surface condition
for seaplanes),

465

AIR REGULATIONS

Ground de-icing

A flight to be planned or expected to operate in suspected or known ground icing
conditions shall not take off unless the aeroplane has been inspected for icing and, if
necessary, has been given appropriate de icing /anti icing treatment. Accumulation of
ice or other naturally occurring contaminants shall be removed so that the aeroplane
is kept in an airworthy condition prior to take off.

Definition and recognition, on ground/in-flight

(a) An operator shall not operate an aeroplane in expected or actual icing conditions
unless it is certificated and equipped to operate in icing conditions.

(b) An operator shall not operate an aeroplane in expected or actual icing conditions
at night unless it is equipped with a means to illuminate or detect the formation
of ice. Any illumination that is used must be of a type that will not cause glare or
reflection that would handicap crew members in the performance of their duties,

De-icing, anti-icing, types of de-icing fluids ;

The most common techniques for removing frozen precipitation from aircraft
critical surfaces and protecting the aircraft against re-contamination are accomplished
with aircraft deicing and anti-icing fluids respectively.

Deicing is a procedure by which frost, ice, snow or slush (i.e. the frozen
contamination) is removed from an aircraft by use of a heated Aircraft Deicing Fluid
(ADF), to provide clean surfaces. Anti-icing is a procedure in which an Aircraft Anti-
Icing Fluid (AAF) is applied to a surface free of frozen contaminants in order to protect
the surface from the accumulation of frozen contaminants for a limited period of time.

De/anti-icing fluids are only required until the aircraft becomes airborne, after
which the on-board de/anti-icing system then operate.

Performance Deterioration, on Ground/in-flight

A very, small amount of roughness, in thickness as low as 0.40 mm (1/64 in.),
caused by ice, snow or frost, disrupts the air flow over the lift and control surfaces of
an aircraft. The consequence of this roughness is severe lift loss, increased drag and
impaired maneuverability, particularly during the take off and initial climb phases of
flight. Ice can also interfere with the movement of control surfaces or add significantly
to aircraft weight. The ice formation can severely affect instruments by blocking static
and Pitot vents or angle of attack vanes. Wind screens may be obscured, undercarriage
obstructed, ice can form skin friction. There is no such thing as an insignificant amount
of ice.

Ice can form even when the Outside Air Temperature (OAT) is well above 0°C
(32°F). An aircraft equipped with wing fuel tanks may have fuel that is at a sufficiently
low temperature such that it lowers the wing skin temperature to below the freezing
point. This phenomenon is known as cold-soaking, This situation can also occur when
an aircraft has been cruising at high altitude for a period of time followed by a quick
descent to a landing in a humid environment. Liquid water coming in contact with a
wing, which is at a below freezing temperature, will then freeze to the wing surfaces.

466

--- Page 240 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

Cold-soaking can also be caused by fueling an aircraft with cold fuel. If there is
rain or high humidity, ice can form on the cold-soaked wing and accumulate over time.
This ice can be invisible to the eye and is often referred to as clear ice. This ice can be
detected by performing a tactile inspection or by using specially designed ice detecting
systems such as a Ground Ice Detection System (GIDS).

Sheets of clear ice dislodged from the wing or fuselage during takeoff or climb can
be ingested by aft fuselage mounted engines, thereby causing a flameout or damage.
Sheets of dislodged clear ice can also cause impact damage to critical surfaces such as
the horizontal stabilizer.

Bird Strike Risk and Avoidance

Bird strike prevention apart the airfield is most effectively conducted by warning
procedures. As there is no direct interference possible to influence bird activity aloft,
the only chance to minimize the risk of bird strikes is to avoid flying through high
bird concentrations in the air. The presence of hazardous bird concentrations are well
known during migration periods in the large temporal and spatial scale.

But they also occur occasionally throughout the year on a local or regional scale,
mainly governed by the diurnal cycle. Monitoring, modeling, warning, predicting,
forecasting are the major aspects of handling the problem and result in a certain
advise, that is passed to the aviation community.

The most effective method for scaring birds is shell crackers. 90% of bird strikes
occur under 500 m.

The observations and studies conducted on the behavior of birds on the ground,
ahead of an aircraft taking off and having reached an average speed of 135 kts, show
that birds fly away about two seconds beforehand.

Departure Climb

Aeroplane operating procedures for the departure climb shall ensure that the
safety of flight operations is maintained while minimizing exposure to noise on the
ground. The following requirements need to be satisfied:

° Noise abatement procedures shall not be executed below a height of 240 m (800
ft) above aerodrome elevation.

° The noise abatement procedure specified by an operator for any one aeroplane
type should be the same for all aerodromes.

° Noise abatement climb procedures are not to be used in conditions where wind
shear warnings exist, or the presence of wind shear or downburst activity is
suspected.

« The maximum acceptable body angle specified for an aeroplane type shall not be
exceeded.

467

AIR REGULATIONS

Aeroplane Operating Procedures — Approach
. Procedures for noise attenuation during landing will not involve use of reverse
thrust.

° During an approach procedure which involves noise abatement, the aeroplane
is to be in the final landing configuration at any point after passing the outer
marker or at a point 5 NM from the threshold of the landing runway, whichever
is earlier.

° Noise preferential routes are established to ensure that departing and arriving
aeroplanes avoid over flying noise-sensitive areas in the vicinity of the aerodrome
as far as practicable.

. Noise abatement shall not be the determining factor in the designation of a
runway, under the following circumstances:

a) when cross wind component, including gust, exceeds 15kt
b) when the tailwind component, including gust, exceeds 5 kt
c) when the runway is not clear or dry

° In establishing noise preferential routes no turns should be required coincident
with a reduction of power associated with a noise abatement procedure.

° No ILS or visual guidance precludes a runway being used for noise abatement
procedures if landing in VMC.

Fire/smoke

Combustion consists of three elements: oxygen, heat, and fuel. Together, these
elements create a chemical chain reaction and result in a fire. The goal of firefighting
is to eliminate at least one element from the fire, in order to extinguish it.

Fue!

The Fire Triangle

468

--- Page 241 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

A fire will continue, unless:

° The fuel supply has been cut off

¢ There is no more oxygen available

* The temperature has been cooled below the flammability temperature.

Class A : Fires that involve wood, paper, cloth, or plastic. Class A fires needed to
be cooled. A water extinguisher, or liquid containing a large percentage of water, for
example, coffee, tea, juice will extinguish a class A fires.

~ Do not use liquid containing alcohol !
~ Water/glycol extinguishers are the most effective for class A fires.

Smoke: Usually gray/brown in color. Can be quite thick, depending on the
quantity of fuel.

Class B: Fires that involve flammable liquid, hydraulic fluid, oil, tar or aircraft fuel.

This type of fire cannot be extinguished with water. Foam or Halon fire
extinguishers should be used to extinguish class B fires.

Smoke: Usually black in color. Very thick, with a distinct oil/petrol-like odor.

Class C: Fires that involve electrical equipment. This type of fire must be extinguished
with a non-conducting mixture, in order to avoid electrocution and damage to electrical
circuitry. Halon fire extinguishers are effective for class C fires.

Smoke: Usually light grey or white, with a bluish tinge. Very fine and can disperse
rapidly. Has a distinct acrid odor.

Class D: Fires that involve flammable metals, such as sodium, magnesium, lithium
and potassium. Special powder extinguishers are effective on class D fires, because of
the possible chemical reaction between the burning and extinguishing agents.

~ Never use Halon fire extinguishers on class D fires.

~ Class A and C fires are the most commonly encountered fires onboard aircraft.

Fire Extinguishers: Hand-held fire extinguishers discharge an extinguishing
-agent for 8 to 25 seconds, depending on their type and capacity. Due to this short
period, it is essential to select and use the appropriate fire extinguisher immediately.

There are different types of fire extinguishers:

» Halon/ BCF (Green) -— is the generic name for the group of
bromochlorodifluoromethane (BCF) extinguishers that can be used for
class A, B, and C fires

» Carbon dioxide (CO,) (Black) for class B and C fires

» Dry powder (DP) (Blue) for class D fires

» Dry chemicals (Blue) for class A, B, and C fires

» Water solution (H,O) (Red) for class A fires.

469

AIR REGULATIONS

e Ahalon extinguisher is three times as effective as CO, extinguishers that contain
the same amount of extinguishing agent.

° Because of its chemical composition, some precautions must be taken when using
Halon fire extinguishers:
~ When a Halon fire extinguisher has been used on a Class A fire, the fire and

the surrounding area must be cooled down with a non-alcoholic liquid.
~ When halon is used in crew compartments or confined areas, Portable
Breathing Equipment (PBE) should be used.

Location:

e Atleast one Halon 1211 type extinguisher should be located on flight deck.
Galleys, personnel and cargo compartments should be equipped with proper
extinguishers.

The ICAO Standards mandate the use of an alternative agent to halon due it’s
impact on environment as it depletes the ozone layer. As of now Halon use is permitted

only in Cargo compartments till 28 Nov 2024.

Actions in case of overheated brakes after aborted take-off and landing :
¢  Overheated brakes - The kinetic energy lost by slowing an aircraft down is usually
translated into heat by friction and could result in:
» Loss of braking performance
» Fire
» Tyre deflation / tyre burst
¢ Brake failure and subsequent poor directional control and deceleration in turn
could result in:
° Runway excursion
° Uncommanded aircraft ground movements / taxiway excursion
¢ Collision with objects on the ground/other aircraft
« Awide range of practical problems could arise following brake related problems:
o High level of stress and increased workload - caused by directional
control and deceleration problems resulting from brake failure during
landing, or during high speed rejected take off (RTO);
o Lack of awareness - Crew might be not aware of fire, tyre burst or deflation
that could result from heavy braking upon landing, RTO, or from smoke
coming from the undercarriage;
~ Request fire and rescue services - hot brake incidents could be
considered by the crew a reason to request attendance of fire and rescue;

~ Decision for emergency evacuation - the cockpit crew could take
the decision for emergency evacuation if fire is detected following a high
energy brake application.

470

--- Page 242 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

Decompression of Pressurized Cabin

Cabin Pressurization is the pumping of compressed air into an aircraft cabin to
maintain a safe and comfortable environment for crew and passengers when flying at
altitude. Loss of pressurisation is a serious emergency in an aircraft flying at the high
cruising altitude for most passenger aircraft.

Causes:

° Structural Failure. Failure of a window, door, or pressure bulkhead for
example, or in-flight explosion. An in-flight explosion may be due to a system
failure, dangerous cargo, or a malicious act such as an explosive device carried on
board by a terrorist.

° Pressurisation system failure. Failure of some part of the pressurisation
system such as an outflow valve perhaps.

* Deliberate Act A drastic measure but one which an aircraft captain might
consider, for example, as a way of clearing the cabin of smoke.

Rapid or Explosive Decompression

Decompression which occurs rapidly and at a rate which is greater than the rate
the lungs can decompress by will cause lung damage. The likelihood of the rate of
decompression reaching a level where lung damage is possible is increased for any
particular size of pressure hull breach by the size of the pressure hull overall.

A decompression of an aircraft which takes less than 0.5 seconds is considered by
most authorities to be “explosive”. The cabin air may fill with dust and debris, and fog
caused by an associated drop in temperature and change in relative humidity. Crew
may be momentarily dazed or shocked, especially if the event was unexpected, and
may therefore be slow to fit oxygen masks.

Slow Decompression

It is similar to Rapid decompression. The only difference is in severity and
availability of reaction time. In both cases the actions by the crew remain same.

Crew and Passenger Incapacitation:

The great danger of depressurisation is crew incapacitation due to Hypoxia.
Depending on the altitude of the aircraft when depressurisation takes place, loss of
pressurisation can very quickly lead to the incapacitation of the crew and passengers
unless they receive supplementary oxygen. The Time of Useful Consciousness is
reduced by the explosive nature of the decompression.

Depressurization warning is required when cabin altitude exceeds 10,000 feet.
Passenger oxygen masks will drop when cabin altitude rises to between 13,200 and
14,000 feet, but no higher than 15,000 feet.

If the cause of the decompression is structural failure, failure of a window for
example, there may be a risk of some crew or passengers being buffeted by strong
winds, nit by debris, and extreme cold temperatures, or even being sucked out of the
aircraft - another reason for wearing a seat belt or harness when seated.

A471

AIR REGULATIONS

Actions:

¢ Oxygen. In the event of loss of pressurisation, it is essential that the crew don
Oxygen equipment as soon as possible. In the case of a deliberate de-pressurisation,
the crew should be on oxygen before the de- pressurisation commences.

¢ Emergency Descent. In the case of an emergency depressurisation, the crew
will want to descend immediately to an altitude at which they and the passengers
can breathe without supplementary oxygen - conventionally 10,000 ft.

Wind Shear, Microburst :

Intense down drafts, typically associated with thunderstorms, produce strong
vertical and horizontal wind shear components that are a hazard to aviation for
aircraft in the approach, landing or takeoff phase of flight. Aircrew capable of reporting
the wind and altitude, both above and below the shear layer, from Flight Management
Systems (FMS) are to do so. Pilots without this equipment should report wind shear
by stating the loss or gain of airspeed and the altitude at which it was encountered.
Pilots not able to report wind shear in these specific terms should do so in terms of its
general effect on the aircraft.

The following guidelines are used to establish whether significant non-convective
wind shear hazardous to aircraft exists:

e vector magnitude exceeding 25 kts within 500 ft AGL;

¢ vector magnitude exceeding 40 kts within 1 000 ft AGL;

® vector magnitude exceeding 50 kts within 1 500 ft AGL;

¢ a pilot report of loss or gain of LAS of 20 kts or more within 1 500 ft AGL.

Microburst

Relatively recent meteorological studies have confirmed the existence of the
“burst” phenomena. These are small scale, intense downdrafts which, on reaching the
surface, spread outward from the down flow centre. This causes the presence of both
vertical and horizontal wind shear that can be extremely hazardous to all types and
categories of aircraft. Wind shear may create a severe hazard for aircraft within 1
000 ft AGL, particularly during the approach to landing and in the takeoff phases. On
takeoff, the aircraft may encounter a headwind (performance increasing) (1) followed
by a downdraft (2), and tailwind (3) (both performance decreasing).

472

--- Page 243 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

* gy Ta
um, TAIL WIND

Characteristics of Microbursts Include:

(a) Size - Approximately 1 NM in diameter at 2 000 ft AGL with a horizontal extent
at the surface of approximately 2 to 2 1/2 NM.

(b) Intensity - Vertical winds as high as 6 000 ft per minute. Horizontal winds giving
as much as 45 KT at the surface (i.e., 90 KT shear).

(c) Types - Microbrusts are normally accompanied by heavy rain in areas where the
air is very humid. However, in drier areas, falling raindrops may have sufficient
time and distance to evaporate before reaching the ground. This is known as
VIRGA.

(d) Duration - The life-cycle of a microburst from the initial downburst to dissipation
will seldom be longer than 15 minutes with maximum intensity winds lasting
approximately 2 - 4 minutes. Sometimes microbursts are concentrated into a line
structure and under these conditions, activity may continue for as long as an
hour.

Once microburst activity starts, multiple microbursts in the same general area
are common and should be expected.

Actions to counter Wind Shear: The best defence against wind shear is to avoid
it altogether because it could be beyond your or your aircraft’s capabilities. However,
should you recognize a wind shear encounter, prompt action is required. In all aircraft,
the recovery could require full power and a pitch attitude consistent with the maximum
angle of attack for your aircraft. Remember, should you experience a wind shear, warn
others, as soon as possible.

473

AIR REGULATIONS

WAKE TURBULENCE

All airfoils produce a wake when they are producing lift. The higher-pressure
air under the wing flows around the wingtip and tries to displace the lower-pressure
-- and consequently lower-energy -- air on the top of the wing. The greater the pressure
differential between the top and bottom of the wing, the stronger the flow around the
wingtip. This airflow from the bottom of the wing tends to disturb the airflow on the
top of the wing -- that’s part of the increase in induced drag you notice with increased
lift!

The air curling up around the wing tip forms a horizontal tornado that trails
behind the airplane and tends to sink somewhat below the producing aircraft’s flight
path -- if that aircraft is in level flight. The vortices produced during a descent are
somewhat less predictable. The vortex produced by the left wing rotates in a clockwise
direction when seen from behind. The one from the right rotates counterclockwise.
Larger airplanes produce stronger vortices because the wings produce more lift to
support the weight of the airplane. The vortices settle behind the aircraft to an altitude
about 1,000 below the aircraft’s flight path, where they tend to remain.

vortices spread laterally from
the rear of the aircraft

A up to 5 miles |

500 - 900 feet

ATA

--- Page 244 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

CATEGORIES:
Super Heavy (S): A separate designation that currently only refers to the Airbus
A880-800, MCTOW(Maximum Certified Take Off Weight) 5,60,000 kgs.

Heavy (H): All aircraft types of 136,000 kg MCTOW or more. Some examples of these
are: Boeing B777, B767, B747, B 787, A 300, A 310, A 330, A 340, A 350, McDonnell
Douglas DC-8, McDonnell Douglas DC-10, MD-11, IL 86, IL 96, AN 225, Lockheed
L-1011 etc.

Medium (M): Aircraft types of more than 7,000 kg and less than 136,000 kg MCTOW.
Some examples of these are: Boeing B727, B737 and B757, A 320, A 321, Bombardier
: Global Express, Challenger, CRJ, Fokker Friendship, Metro 4 , BAe—146, Dash 8,
ATR-72, Hercules, DC—3, Saab 340 etc.

Light (L): Aircraft types of less than 7,000 kg MCTOW. Some of the examples of these
are: Bandeirante, Metro 3 , Cessna 402 and 421, Islander, Nomad, Piper Navajo, King
air Beech 99 etc.

WAKE TURBULENCE LONGITUDINAL SEPARATION MINIMA
TIME BASED
ARRIVING AIRCRAFT

A Minimum separation as given in Table shall be applied

“2 [-aseo-s00 (LIGHT. =i Mints
~4.| HEAVY ORMEDIOM [LIGHT —___—~([@Mimtes———_—*|

DEPARTING AIRCRAFT

A minimum separation as given in Table shall be applied when the aircrafts are using:

a) the same runway;

b) parallel runways separated by less than 760 m (2500 ft);

c) crossing runways if the projected flight path of the second aircraft will cross the
projected flight path of the first aircraft at the same altitude or less than 1000 ft
below;

d) parallel runways separated by 760 m (2500 ft) or more, if the projected flight path
of the second aircraft will cross the projected flight path of the first aircraft at the
same altitude or less than 1000 ft below.

475

AIR REGULATIONS

o. | Leading Aircraft Following Aircraft

380-800 Non A380-800 HEAVY
|2. | asso-s00 | MEDIUMor LIGHT

LIGHT or MEDIUM

A minimum separation as given shall be applied when the aircraft are departing
from:

a) an intermediate part of the same runway; or
b) an intermediate part of a parallel runway separated by less than 760 m (2500 ft).

DISPLACED LANDING THRESHOLD

A separation minimum as specified in Table shall be applied between aircraft operating
on a runway with a displaced landing threshold.

IS. No. | Leading Aircraft Following Aircraft
A380-800 Arrival LIGHT or MEDIUM

380-800 Departure _| LIGHT or MEDIUM

3 HEAVY Arrival LIGHT or MEDIUM 2 Minutes
Departure

MEDIUM Arrival _| LIGHT Departure

HEAVY Departure LIGHT or MEDIUM 2 Minutes
Arrival
6 | MEDIUM Departure | LIGHT Arrival

476

--- Page 245 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

The distance based wake turbulance separation minima as given in Table shall
be applied to aircraft being provided with an ATS surveillance service in the approach
and departure phases of flight.

i) an aircraft is operating directly behind another aircraft at the same altitude or less
than 1000 ft below; or

ii) both aircrafts are using the same runway, or parallel runways separated by less
than 760 m; or

iii) an aircraft is crossing behind anoher aircraft, at the same altitude or less than 1000
ft below.

Preeceding Aircaft Succeeding Aircraft Distance Base Wake
Turbulance
Separation Minima
A380-800/ A380-800 Not required+
Non A380-800 HEAVY
Non A380-800 HEAVY 6 NM*

A380-800 MEDIUM 7 NM*
LIGHT 8 NM*

HEAVY 5 NM*
HEAVY / ep |

LIGHT 6 NM*
HEAVY Not required+
LIGHT 5 NM*
HEAVY Not required+
MEDIUM Not required+
LIGHT Not required+

+ When a wake turbulance restriction is not required, then separation reverts to prescribed radar separation
minimum,

* In the airspace wherein prescribed radar separation minimum is more than applicable wake turbulance
separation minimum, prescribed radar separation minimum will have precedence over wake turbulance
separation minimum.

A477

AIR REGULATIONS

DEALING WITH WAKE TURBULENCE

Wake Turbulence Characteristics: Wake turbulence is created only when an
airplane develops lift. It is greatest when generating airplane is heavy, clean and slow.
In wake turbulence the circulation of vortex is outward, upward and around each wing

tip.
t

Handling Wake Turbulence:

e Fly upwind rather than downwind of the flight path of a large aircraft.

¢ The most dangerous wind while landing or taking off behind large aircraft is light
quartering tailwind.

e When taking off behind a larger aircraft, lift off before the larger aircraft’s liftoff
point and climb above its climb path.

e When landing behind a larger aircraft, touch down past its touchdown point.

¢  Vortices will stay on the runway longer in light or calm winds.

¢ In light crosswinds, the upwind vortex will tend to drift onto and remain on the
runway.

*  Vortices from a large aircraft landing on a parallel runway can be blown onto your
runway by a strong crosswind.

e When flying or crossing behind a larger aircraft, maintain your flight path above
the large aircraft’s path rather than below.

e¢ | When approaching behind a larger aircraft on an ILS, stay at or above the glide
slope to avoid wake encounters.

° In light crosswinds, the upwind vortex will tend to drift onto and remain on the
runway.

*  Vortices from a large aircraft landing on a parallel runway can be blown onto your
runway by a strong crosswind.

¢ When flying or crossing behind a larger aircraft, maintain your flight path above
the large aircraft’s path rather than below.

* When approaching behind a larger aircraft on an ILS, stay at or above the glide
slope to avoid wake encounters.

478

--- Page 246 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

SECURITY

Reporting acts of unlawful interference

Following an act of unlawful interference on board an aeroplane the commander
or, in his absence the operator, shall submit, without delay, a report of such an act to
the designated local authority and the Authority in the State of the operator.
Emergency and precautionary landings operations in various terrain -

The forced landing is defined as an immediate landing, on or off an airport,
necessitated by the inability to continue further flight. A typical example would be an
airplane forced to land due to engine failure.

The precautionary landing is a premeditated landing, on or off the airport,
when further flight is possible but inadvisable. Examples might include making
a landing due to deteriorating weather, being lost, fuel shortage, and gradually
developing engine trouble.

Ditching is defined as a forced or precautionary landing on water.

FUEL JETTISONING

General -

An aircraft in an emergency or other urgent situations may need to dump fuel so
as to reduce to maximum landing weight in order to effect a safe landing.

When an aircraft operating within controlled airspace requires to dump fuel, the
flight crew shall advise ATC. The ATC unit should then coordinate with the flight crew
the following:

(a) the route to be flown which, if possible, should be clear of cities and towns,

preferably over water and away from areas where thunderstorms have been
reported or are expected;

(b) the level to be used, which should be not less than 1800 m (6000 ft); and
(c) duration of the fuel dumping.

SEPARATION

Other known traffic should be separated from the aircraft dumping fuel by:
(a) at least 19 km (10 NM) horizontally, but not behind the aircraft dumping fuel;
(b) vertical separation if behind the aircraft dumping fuel within 15 minutes flying
time or a distance of 93 km (50 NM) by:
@)_ at least 300 m (1000 ft) if above the aircraft dumping fuel; and
(ii) at least 900 m (3000 ft) if below the aircraft dumping fuel.
Note:—~ The horizontal boundaries of the area within which other traffic requires
appropriate vertical separation extend for 19 km (10 NM) either side of the track flown

by the aircraft which is dumping fuel from 19 km (10 NM) ahead, to 93 km (50 NM) or
15 minutes along track behind it (including turns).

479

AIR REGULATIONS

COMMUNICATIONS

If the aircraft will maintain radio silence during the fuel dumping operation,
the frequency to be monitored by the flight crew and the time when radio silence will
terminate should be agreed.

Transport of dangerous goods

More than half of the cargo carried by all modes of transport in the world is
dangerous cargo ~ explosive, corrosive, flammable, toxic and even radioactive. These
dangerous goods are essential for a wide variety of global industrial, commercial,
medical and research requirements and processes. Because of the advantages of air
transport, a great deal of this dangerous cargo is carried by aircraft.

Dangerous goods forbidden for transport by air unless exempted
The dangerous goods described hereunder shall be forbidden on aircraft unless
exempted by the States concerned :

a) articles and substances that are identified in the Technical Instructions as
being forbidden for transport in normal circumstances; and
b) infected live animals.
Contaminated Runways

Braking action, brake co-efficient

Runway surface friction is directly relevant to the braking action which will be
available to an aircraft decelerating after touch down, or after a decision to reject a
take off.

For most multi crew aircraft, anti skid braking systems will be fitted which
prevent wheel locking and can allow more aggressive brake input for wheels which are
rotating on wet or otherwise slippery runways, without inducing dynamic or viscous
Aquaplaning.

Aircraft braking coefficient is dependent upon the surface friction between surface
and aircraft tires. Less friction means less aircraft braking coefficient. and less aircraft
braking.

Landing - Wet and contaminated runways

An operator shall ensure that when the appropriate weather reports or forecasts,
or a combination thereof, indicate that the runway at the estimated time of arrival
may be wet, the landing distance available is at least 115% of the required landing
distance, determined .

480

--- Page 247 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

DYNAMIC HYDROPLANING :

Aquaplaning also known as hydroplaning, is a condition that exists when landing
on a surface with standing water deeper than the tread depth of the tires. When the
brakes are applied, there is a possibility that the brake will lock up and the tire will ride
on the surface of the water, much like a water ski. When the tires are hydroplaning,
directional control and braking action are virtually impossible. An effective anti-skid
system can minimize the effects of hydroplaning.

481

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

MMEL is drawn up by:

A) — The operator and approved by the certification authority

B) The manufacturer and approved by the DGCA

C) The operator from a main list drawn up by the manufacturer

The Minimum Equipment List (MEL) is established by:

A) _ The airline operator

B) The aeronautical authority the airline operator depends on
C) The manufacturer

A piece of equipment on your public transport airplane fails while you are still
parked. The reference document you use in the first place to decide on the
procedure to follow is:

A) The minimum equipment list

B) The flight manual

C) The operation manual’s chapter “Abnormal and Emergency Procedures”

The minimum equipment list of a public transport airplane is to be found in the:

A) — Flight manual
B) Operation manual
C) CAROPS

In public transport, prior take-off in icing conditions, the captain must check

that:

A) External surfaces are free from any ice accretion which may impede the
airplane performance and manoeuvrability, except within the limits specified by
the flight manual

B) External surfaces are free from any ice accretion greater than 5mm

C) Possible ice accretions do not cause to exceed weight and balance limits

The accumulation of snow or ice on an aircraft in flight induces an increase in
the:

A) Value of the stall angle of attack

B) Roll rate

C) Stalling speed

482

--- Page 248 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

7.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Which of the following requirements should be met when planning a flight with

icing conditions:

A) _ The flight should be planned so that a change of cruising level can be initiated
rapidly

B) The aircraft shall before flight sprayed with anti-icing fluid

C) The aircraft shall be equipped with approved ice-protection systems

You are the captain of a commercial airpiane and you notice, after take-off, a
flock of birds which may present a bird strike hazard, you must:

A) _ Immediately inform the appropriate ground station

B) Draft a bird strike hazard report upon arrival and within at most 48 hours

C) Inform the appropriate ground station within a reasonable period of time

What is the most effective method for scaring birds?
A) Land rover with loudspeaker.

B) Shell crackers.

C) Making movement.

90% of bird strikes occur:

A) Under 500 m.

B) Between 500 and 1 500 m.
C) Above 1 000 m.

The observations and studies conducted on the behaviour of birds on the
ground, ahead of an aircraft taking off and having reached an average speed of
135 kt, show that birds fly away:

A) From the beginning of the takeoff roll.

B) About ten seconds beforehand.

C) About two seconds beforehand.

Who has the responsibility for establishing operating procedures for noise
abatement purposes during instrument flight in compliance with ICAO PANS

OPS the:

A) Operator

B) State in which the aeroplane is operating
C) Commander

About procedures for noise attenuation during landing:

A) — Such procedures will not involve the prohibition of using reverse thrust
B) Such procedures do not exist

C) They prohibit the use of reverse thrust

483

14,

15.

16.

17.

18.

AIR REGULATIONS

Noise abatement shall not be the determining factor in the designation of a
runway, under the following circumstances:

1. when cross wind component, including gust, exceeds 15kt

2. when the tailwind component, including gust, exceeds 5 kt

3. when the runway is not clear or dry

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,3
B) 2,3
Cc) 1,2,3

In accordance with (ICAO) DOC 8168 - OPS, noise preferential routes are

established to ensure that departing and arriving aeroplanes avoid over flying

noise-sensitive areas in the vicinity of the aerodrome as far as practicable. In

establishing noise preferential routes:

A) No turns should be required coincident with a reduction of power associated
with a noise abatement procedure.

B) Turns during take-off and climb should not be required unless the bank angle
for turns is limited to 28° (climbing at V2 + 10 to 20 Kt).

C) Turns during take-off and climb should not be required unless the aeroplane
has reached and can maintain throughout the turn a height of no less than 100
m above terrain and the highest obstacle.

What precludes a runway being used for noise abatement procedures if landing
in VMC?

A) _ Tailwind up to 3kts.

B) No ILS or visual guidance.

C) Crosswind including gusts of 10kts.

During an approach procedure which involves noise abatement, the aeroplane
is to be in the final landing configuration at any point after passing the ... or at
a point ... from the threshold of the landing runway, whichever is earlier.

A) _ Final marker, 6NM

B) Middle marker, 5NM

C) Outer marker, 5NM

In case of an engine nozzie fire while on ground you:

A) _ Pull the fire shut off handle and trigger the engines fire-extinguisher
B) Carry out a dry cranking

C) Carry out a damp cranking

484

--- Page 249 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

19.

20.

21.

23.

To extinguish a fire in the cockpit, you use:

1. Awater fire-extinguisher 2. Apowder or chemical fire-extinguisher
3. Ahalon fire-extinguisher 4. ACO, fire-extinguisher

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 2,3,4
B) 1,2
C) 3,4

You will use a CO, fire-extinguisher for:
1. Apaperfire 2. Aplastic fire 3. Ahydrocarbon fire 4. An electrical fire
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 3,4
B) 1,2,3
C) 1,2,3,4

You will use a dry chemical powder fire-extinguisher for:
1. Apaper fire 2.Aplastic fire 3.Ahydrocarbonfire 4. An electrical fire
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,4
B) 1,2,3
C) 1,2,3,4

CO, type extinguishers are fit to fight:

1. ClassAfires 2. Class B fires

3. Electrical source fires 4. Special fires: metals, gas, chemical product
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,2,3
B) 1,3,4
C) 2,3,4

To fight a fire in an air-conditioned cargo hold:

A) You turn off the cargo hold ventilation and extinguish fire

B) _ Extinguish fire only

C) _ Fire-fighting is not necessary, since the transport of combustible goods in an
air-conditioned cargo hold is forbidden

485

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

AIR REGULATIONS

In case of a fire due to the heating of the brakes, you fight the fire using:

1. Adry powder fire extinguisher 2. A water spray atomizer

3. Awater fire-extinguisher 4. A CO, fire-extinguisher to the maximum
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,2
B) 1,4
C) 3,4

Aclass A fire is a fire of:

A) — Electrical origin

B) Solid material, generally of organic nature
C) Liquid or liquefiable solid

After landing, in case of high temperature of the brakes you:

A) _ Release the parking brake and you approach the wheels sidewards

B) Release the parking brake and you approach the wheels either from aft or fore
C) Apply the parking brake and approach the wheels sidewards

H,O extinguishers are fit to fight:
A) Class A fires

B) Electrical source fires

C) Class B fires

The fire-extinguisher types which may be used on Class B fires are:
1.H,O 2.CO, 3. Dry-chemical 4. Halogen
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 3,4
B) 1,2,3,4
Cc) 2,3,4

The fire-extinguisher types which may be used on Class A fires are:
1.H,O 2.CO, 3.Dry-chemical 4. Halogen
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 3,4
B) 1,2,3,4
C) 2,3,4

486

--- Page 250 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

A dry-chemical type fire extinguisher is fit to fight:

1. Class A fires 2. Class B fires

3. Electrical source fires 4. Special fires: metals, gas, chemicals
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,2,3,4
B) 3,4
C) 1,2,3

A fire occurs in a wheel and immediate action is required to extinguish it. The
safest extinguishant to use is:

A) CO, (carbon dioxide)

B) Foam

C) Dry powder

To use passengers oxygen in case of severe cabin smoke is:

A) Useless because breathing oxygen would explode under smoke conditions
B) Useless because the toxical cabin smoke is mixed with the breathing oxygen
C) Possible and recommended

Following a heavy mass landing on a short runway, you should check the:
A) Temperature of the brakes

B) Pressure of the hydraulic fluid

C) Pressure of the pneumatic tyres

The correct statement about extinguishing agents on board aeroplanes is:

A) Water may only be used for minor fires

B) Burning cargo in cargo-aeroplanes is usually extinguished by using carbon
dioxide

C) Halon is an effective extinguishing agent for use in aeroplanes

If smoke appears in the air conditioning, the first action to take is to:
A) Determine which system is causing the smoke

B) Begin an emergency descent

C) Puton the mask and goggles

Beneath fire extinguishers the following equipment for the fire fighting is on
board:

A) Ahydraulic winch and a big box of tools

B) —Abig bunch of fire extinguishing blankets

C) Crash axes or crowbars

487

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

AIR REGULATIONS

Aciass B fire is a fire of:

A) Liquid or liquefiable solid

B) — Solid material usually of organic nature
C) Special fire: metal, gas, chemical product

Fire fighting in the toilets must be performed with:
A) All available extinguishers simultaneously

B) All available extinguishers in sequence

C) All available liquids

The system which must be switched off in case of a belly compartment fire is
generally the:

A) _ Ventilation of the cargo compartment

B) Trim air

C) Pressurization

You will use a water fire-extinguisher (straight jet) on a fire of:
1. Solid (fabric, carpet, ...) 2. Liquids (ether, gasoline, ...)

3 Gas 4. Metals (sodium, ...)
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 3

B) 1

Cc) 2

You will use a halon extinguisher for a fire of:
1. Solids (fabric, plastic, ...) 2. Liquids (alcohol, gasoline, ...)

3. Gas 4. Metals (aluminium, magnesium, ...)
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,2,4

B) 1,2,3,4

Cc) 1,2,3

An ongine fire warning will switch on the relevant fire shut-off-handle. The fire
shut-off-handle will be switched off when:

A) _ Fire is no longer detected

B) _ The fire-extinguisher has been triggered

C) The fire shut-off handle has been pulled

488

--- Page 251 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

43.

45.

46.

47.

A 1211 halon fire-extinguisher can be used for:
1.Apaper fire 2.Afabricfire 3. An electric fire
4.Awood fire 5. A hydrocarbon fire

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 2,4,5
B) 2,3,4
C) 1,2,3,4,5

ACO, fire extinguisher can be used for:

1.A paper fire 2.Ahydrocarbon fire 3. A fabric fire
4. An electrical fire 5. A wood fire

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 2,4,5
B) 1,2,3,4,5
C) 1,3,5

A water fire-extinguisher can be used without restriction for:
1. Apaper fire 2.Ahydrocarbon fire 3. A fabric fire

4. An electrical fire 5. A wood fire

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 2,3,4
B) 1,2,3,4,5
C) 1,3,5

After a landing, with overweight and over speed conditions, the tyres and
brakes are extremely hot. The fireguards should approach the landing gear
tyres:

A) — Only from left or right sides

B) From any side

C) Only from front or rear side

For a flight deck fire which of the following do you use?

1. BCF.

2. Halton.

3. Dry Powder.
4. Water.

A) 1,2&3.

B) 1,2,38&4.
C) 1&2.

489

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54,

AIR REGULATIONS

An aircraft is configured for seating 61 to 200 passengers. What is the
requirement for hand held fire extinguishers.

A) 4 conveniently located in the passenger compartment.

B) 2-conveniently located in the passenger compartment.

C) 3 conveniently located in the passenger compartment.

The number of hand fire extinguishers which must be conveniently located in
the passenger compartment when the maximum approved passenger seating
configuration is between 401 and 500 is:

A) 3.

B) 6.

Cc) 5.

Water fire extinguisher with a directed spray can be used on which fires?
A) Gas fires.

B) Liquid fires.

C) Solid fires.

You will use a Halon extinguisher for a fire of:
1. Solids (fabric, plastic, ...) 2. liquids (alcohol, gasoline, ...)
3. Gas 4. metals (aluminium, magnesium, ...)

A) 2,3,4
B) 1,2,4
Cc) 1,2,3

Fire extinguishers should be located in the pilots compartment and...

A) At each passenger compartment that is separate from the pilots compartment
and not readily accessible to the flight crew.

B) Inthe passenger cabin.

C)  Ateach door.

In case of an engine jet pipe fire while on the ground you:

A) Carry out a wet motoring cycle.

B) Carry out a dry motoring cycle.

Cc) Pull the fire shut off handle and trigger the engines fire extinguishers.

If cabin altitude increases during level flight, the differential pressure:

A) Decreases
B) Remains constant
C) Increases

490

--- Page 252 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

The minimum requirements for Supplemental Oxygen to be supplied in
pressurised aeroplanes during and following an emergency descent are that
for pilots it shall be available for the entire flight time that the cabin pressure
altitude exceeds a minimum of X feet. That minimum of X feet is:

A)  13000ft
B)  14000ft
C) 15000ft

Aslow decompression may be caused by:

A) _ loss of a cabin window

B) aleak ina door seal during normal pressurised flight
C) loss of a door

When flying in straight and level flight at FL290 for some considerable time a
small leak develops in the cabin which causes a slow depressurisation, this
can be seen on the cabin rate of climb indicator which will indicate:

A) Arate of climb _
B) Zero

C) Arate of descent of approximately 300fpm

An aeroplane suffers an explosive decompression at an altitude of 31000ft.
What is the initial action by the operating crew?

A) _ Place the seat belts signs to ON

B) To put on oxygen masks

C) Transmit a MAYDAY message

Aslow decompression may be caused by:
1 a cracked window

2 a bad functioning of the pressurization
3 a minor leak in the fuselage

4 the loss of a door

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,2
B) 3,4
C) 1,2,3

491

4

AIR REGULATIONS

60. A fast decompression is recognizeable by the following elements:

61.

62.

63.

1. Mist in the cabin

2. Blast towards the exterior of the aircraft

3. Expansion of body gases

4. Blast of air released violently from the lungs
The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,4
B) 1,2,3,4
C) 1,2,3

Supplemental oxygen is used to:

A) _ provide people on board with oxygen during a cabin depressurisation
B) protect a crew who fights a fire

C) assist a passenger with breathing disorders

Oxygen should be used after rapid decompression in an emergency descent
until what altitude?

A)  14000ft.
B)  13000ft.
C)  10000ft.

In case of an unexpected encounter with windshear, you will:

1. set the maximum take-off thrust

2. increase the pitch-up attitude up to the limit actuating the stick shaker
3. pull in the drag devices (gear and flaps)

4. keep the airplane’s current configuration

5. try to reach the maximum lift-to-drag ratio

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,2,4
B) 1,3,5
C) 3,5

492

--- Page 253 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

64,

65.

66.

67.

68.

If you encounter a “microburst” just after taking-off, at the beginning you will
have:

1. Ahead wind

2. A strong rear wind

3. Better climb performances

4. A diminution of climb gradient

5. An important thrust drop

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,4
B) 1,3
C) 4,5

During a landing approach, the aircraft is subjected to windshear with an
increasing tailwind. In the absence of a pilot action, the aircraft:

1. flies above the glide path

2. flies below the glide path

3. has an increasing true airspeed

4. has a decreasing true airspeed

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 2,3
B) 1,4
C) 2,4

Wind shear may be described as a change in wind direction and/or speed in
space, including up draughts and downdraughts. To counter the effects of
windshear the amount of control action that is required is:

A) Substantial

B) Medium

C) Null

While approaching the outer-marker, the tower informs you about the presence
of a “microburst”. You will expect to encounter:

A) Convection motion of air mass

B) Supercooled water

C) Windshear (vertical and horizontal)

One of the main characteristics of windshear is that it:

A) Occurs only at a low altitude (2000ft) and never in the horizontal plane
B) Can occur at any altitude in both the vertical and horizontal planes

C Can occur at any altitude and only in the horizontal plane

493

69.

70.

71,

72.

73.

74.

AIR REGULATIONS

Which one of the following magnitudes will be the first to change its value
when penetrating a wind shear?

A) _ Indicated airspeed

B) Groundspeed

C) ‘Vertical speed

An aircraft which experiences a headwind of 40kt while making its way towards
the centre of a microburst may expect, when crossing the microburst, to face a
windshear of:

A) 40kt
B)  80kt
C)  20kt

When a commercial transport passenger airplane is equipped with a door in

the flight crew compartment area, this door must include:

A) Alocking system to prevent any unauthorized access

B) A sealing system allowing the maintenance for as long as possible of the
pressure in the cockpit in case of a depressurization in the compartment area

C) _ Distinctive red or yellow colored markings indicating the access area (in case
of a blocked door)

In addition to inform each State, whose citizens are known to be on board an
aircraft, the State of the country in which an aircraft has landed after an act of
unlawful interference must immediately notify the:

A) State of Registry of the aircraft, the State of the operator and ICAO

B) State of Registry of the aircraft and the State of the operator only

C) State of Registry of the aircraft and the DGCA

In case of a hi-jack, the squawk code is:

A) 2000
B) 7500
C) 7700

The flight deck door should be capable of being:

A) Remotely locked from either inside or outside the compartment

B) Remotely locked by cabin crew operation from outside the compartment
C) Locked from within the compartment

494

--- Page 254 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

Who has the responsibility to take adequate measures for the safety of
passengers and crew of an aircraft which is subjected to an act of unlawful
interference until their journey can be continued? The:

A) Contracting State in which the unlawful interference occurs

B) Commander of the aircraft

C) DGCA

Following an act of unlawful interference on board an aeroplane, to whom the

commander should submit a report of the act to:

A) _ Both the local authority and the Authority of the State of the operator

B) The local Authority only

C) The Authority of the State within which the aeroplane is operating at the time of
the unlawful interference

When flight crew members are at their duty stations they must:
A) Wear a communications head set.

B) Keep the seat belts fastened.

C) ‘Fully raise the seat.

In addition to informing each State, whose citizens are known to be on board
an aircraft, the State of the country in which an aircraft has landed after an act
of unlawful interference must immediately notify the:

A) _ State of Registry of the aircraft, the State of the operator and ICAO.

B) State of Registry of the aircraft and the State of the operator only.

C) State of the operator, the J.A‘A. and ICAO.

In case of ditching, the cabin attendants will:

1. evacuate women and children first

2. have the passengers embark directly in the life rafts

3. prevent passenger movements which may impede the airplane’s flotation
ability

4. ensure the complete evacuation of the airplane

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,4
B) 2,3,4
C) 2,3

Mist in the cabin, pressure and temperature drop characterize:
A) A fast depressurization

B) Aplastic fire

C) Aslow depressurization

495

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

AIR REGULATIONS

In the event of a precautionary landing, who is responsible for alerting the
emergency services?

A) The operations dispatcher.

B) The commander.

C) ATC.

If ditching is inevitable:

A) Passengers should be briefed that even if they successfully evacuate the
aeroplane it is inevitable that some of them will die from drowning.

B) The use of life jackets is to be reiterated before the ditching.

C) Life jackets are to be inflated before leaving the aeroplane.

From the following list:

1. Fuel jettisoning system and its operation are free from fire hazard

2. The fuel discharges clear of any part of the aeroplane

3. Fuel fumes do not enter any part of the aeroplane

4. The jettison operation does not adversely affect the controllability of the
aeroplane
Which of the above are requirements that must be shown to exist during
fuel jettisoning tests:

A) 1,4
B) 1,2,3,4
C) 2,3

Fuel Jettison should be carried out:
A) — Anywhere if unavoidable.

B) Above 6,000ft AGL.

C) All answers are correct.

Fuel Jettison:

A) May be ordered by ATC to reduce aeroplane mass in an emergency situation.

B) Is a procedure to reduce mass in an emergency only.

C) Is a procedure that may be employed to reduce aeroplane mass where an
overweight landing may result in damage to the aeroplane.

A list of dangerous goods, which may not be transported by air, can be found
in:

A) _ The shipper’s declaration for dangerous goods

B) The technical instructions for the safe transport of dangerous goods by air

C) Annex 18 to the Chicago convention

496

--- Page 255 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

87.

89.

90.

91.

92.

In compliance with the CAR-OPS, in order to carry hazardous materials on
board a public transport airplane, they must be accompanied with a:

A) _ Representative of the company owning the materials

B) Specialized handling employee

C) Transport document for hazardous materials

The general information, instructions and recommendations on the transport
of hazardous materials are specified in the:

A) _ AIP (Aeronautical Information Publication)

B) Operation manual

C) ‘Flight manual

Products or materials are considered to be dangerous goods if the products or

materials in question are defined as such by:

A) The IATA document entitled “Regulations governing the transportation of
dangerous goods by air”

B) The directive of the Community Union

C) The ICAO document entitled “Technical Instructions for the safe transportation
of dangerous goods by air”

ICAO Appendix 18 is a document dealing with:

A) _ The air transport of live animats

B) The safety of the air transport of hazardous materials
C) The noise pollution of aircraft

The dangerous goods transport document, if required, shall be drawn up by:

A) The shipper
B) The handling agent
C) The captain

Can dangerous goods be carried in the passenger cabin or on the flight deck?

A) Yes, provided they are non toxic.
B) Yes, if authorised by the authority.
C) Yes, but only goods specified in the technical instructions

497

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

AIR REGULATIONS

Your flight manual does not include specific supplementary information on
landing distances on wet runways and the service bulletins or weather reports
indicate that the runway may be wet at the estimated time of arrival. The
required landing distance on a dry runway must be increased by:

A) 15%
B) 18%
C) 17.6%

Arunway is considered damp when:

A) _ Its surface is not dry, and when surface moisture does not give a shiny
appearance

B) _ {tis covered with a film of water of less than 3mm

C) Surface moisture gives it a shiny appearance

A runway is considered wet when:

1. It is covered with a quantity of water or loose or slushy snow less than or
equal to the equivalent of 3mm of water

2. The amount of surface moisture is sufficient to modify its colour but does
not give it a shiny appearance

3. The amount of surface moisture is sufficient to make it reflective, but
does not create large stagnant sheets of water

4. It bears stagnant sheets of water

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,2
B) 1,2,3
Cc) 1,3

The presence of dynamic hydroplaning depends primarily on the:
A) — Strength of the headwind

B)  Aircraft’s weight

C) Depth of the standing water of the runway

The braking efficiency is a piece of information presenting itself in the form of
a:

A) _ Letter falling between A and E

B) Combination of the terms: poor, medium, good

C) Zero followed by two decimals

498

--- Page 256 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

Arunway covered with 4 mm thick water, is said to be:
A) Contaminated.

B) Flooded.

C) Damp.

Arunway is considered damp when:

A) _ Itis covered with a film of water of less than 1 mm.

B) Its surface is not dry, and when surface moisture does not give it a shiny
appearance

C) It is covered with a film of water of less than 3 mm.

The effect whereby a tyre is lifted from the runway due to aeroplane speed
along the runway is known as:

A) Surface tension.

B) — Hydroplaning.

C)  Aqua-skimming.

Viscous hydroplaning is caused by:
A) Asmooth and dirty runway surface.
B) Bald tyres.

C)  Arough runway surface.

What is the shortest distance in a sequence for landing between a “Heavy”
aircraft preceeding a “Light” aircraft

A) 3NM
B) 6NM
C)  2km

A separation minimum shall be applied between a LIGHT or MEDIUM aircraft
and a HEAVY aircraft and between a LIGHT aircraft and a MEDIUM aircraft
when the heavier aircraft is making a low or missed approach and the lighter
aircraft is landing on the same runway in the opposite direction or on a parallel
opposite direction runway separated by:

A) Less than 730m

B) Less than 760m

C) 730m

499

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

AIR REGULATIONS

A separation minimum shall be applied between a LIGHT or MEDIUM aircraft
and a HEAVY aircraft and between a LIGHT aircraft and a MEDIUM aircraft when
the heavier aircraft is making a low or missed approach and the lighter aircraft
utilizing an opposite direction runway for take off, this minimum is:

A)  2minutes

B)  3minutes

C) 1minute

In order to meet the wake turbulence criteria, what minimum separation should
be applied when a MEDIUM aircraft is taking off behind a HEAVY aircraft and
both are using the same runway?

A) 1 minute

B) 3minutes

C) 2minutes

In order to meet wake turbulence criteria, for arriving aircraft and using timed
approaches, what minima shall be applied to aircraft landing behind a heavy or
a medium aircraft?

A) Medium aircraft other medium aircraft- 2 minutes

B) Medium aircraft behind heavy aircraft- 3 minutes

C) Medium aircraft behind heavy aircraft- 2 minutes

What is the minimum wake turbulence separation criteria when a LIGHT aircraft
is taking off behind a MEDIUM aircraft and both are using the same runway?
A) 1 minute

B) 3 minutes

C) 2minutes

The letter “L” is written in the wake turbulence box of a flightplan form when
the maximum certified take-off weight of an aircraft is less than or equal to:

A)  14000kg

B) 20000kg

C) 7000kg

Wake turbulence risk is highest:

A) _ If, just before landing a much lighter aircraft has landed at the same runway
with heavy crosswind.

B) Whena heavy aircraft has just performed a take-off at a closely situated parallel
runway with a light crosswind.

C) When a preceding aircraft has briefly applied take-off thrust just prior to take
off. .

500

--- Page 257 ---

SPECIAL OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES AND HAZARDS (GENERAL ASPECTS)

ANSWERS

Pa f2;3 45 }et7 {alo} ol am} 12 | 13 | 14 |

reperete te reteyas} tela fale,
re [16 [a7 [18 [te [20 | at] 22 [os] 2] 25 | 6 | 27 28
Ate tele fe iefefasayaley ® [ate
ato [a [2 [oe fe [sl ely] el el oO] ale
estate le jatefetejafat aye [eq
alu [ele [a7 [el el oole] 2] | of |
retetefetejefefeletsepa [ale

sr [se [so [oo [or [eo | os] or [es] | | 08 | 0 [70]
pate tefeyaltefavetcyai ey} ef ale

71 [2 [7s [7 [re [7 [7 [rere] 0] | | oe
pata qetefatafetas tale) ® [ele
as [as [7 [ss [eo [00 | or] [ea] a] 86 | 7 |e

ete tefelie fe eiaieiayatet ¢] etal

[99 [100 | 704 [ 102 [108 | 104 | 105 | 106 [107 | 108 | 109
PBB LATS Te yA Tey ei e{c{ el

501

AIR REGULATIONS

502

--- Page 258 ---

19

COMMUNICATIONS

(Ref: ICAO ANNEXUTE10, DOC 4444, AIP INDIA)

VFR COMMUNICATIONS

Definitions
See chapter 1 of volume 1 for definitions and abbreviations.

Commonly Used Abbreviations Specific to R/T:

Some abbreviations, which by their common usage have become part of aviation
terminology, may be spoken using their constituent letters rather than the spelling
alphabet, for example, ILS, QNH, RVR, etc.

Q-code groups commonly used in RTF air-ground communications :

{ DL | Do you intend to ask me for a series of bearings? | I intend to ask you for a series of bearings.

| Will you indicate the MAGNETIC heading for The MAGNETIC heading for you to steer to
| me to steer towards you (or ...) with no wind? reach me (or ...) with no wind was ... degrees
(at ... hours).

_] What is my MAGNETIC bearing from you (or Your MAGNETIC bearing from me (or from...)
| from ...)? was ... degrees (at ... hours).

What should I set on the subscale of my If you set the subscale of your altimeter to read
altimeter so that the instrument would indicate | ... millibars, the instrument would indicate

~ J its height above the reference elevation being its height above aerodrome elevation (above
used? threshold, runway number ...).

The magnetic direction (or number) of the

| What is the magnetic direction (or number) of runway to be used is ...
Note:— The runway number is indicated by a
two-figure group and the magnetic direction
by a three-figure group.

503

AIR REGULATIONS

| May I land using ... (procedure or facility)? You may land using ... (procedure or facility).

On landing at ... (place) at ... hours, with your
What indication will my altimeter give on sub-scale being set to 1013.2 millibars (29.92
landing at ... (place) at ... hours, my sub-scale inches), your altimeter will indicate ...
being set to 1013.2 millibars (29.92 inches)? (figures and units).

If you set the subscale of your altimeter to read
... millibars, the instrument would indicate its
What should I set on the subscale of my elevation if your aircraft were on the ground at
altimeter so that the instrument would indicate | my station at ... hours.
its elevation if my aircraft were on the ground | Note:— When the setting is given in hundredths
~ } at your station? of inch the abbreviation INS is used to identify
the units.

What is my TRUE bearing from you? Your TRUE bearing from me is ... degrees at ...
or hours.
What is my TRUE bearing from ... (call sign)?

or
or Your TRUE bearing from ... (call sign) was ...
What is the TRUE bearing of ... (call sign) from | degrees at ... hours.

. (call sign)?

or
The TRUE bearing of ... (call sign) from ...
(call sign) was ... degrees at ... hours.

|} Will you indicate the TRUE track to reach you | The TRUE track to reach me (or ...) is degrees
(or ...)? at... hours.

Categories of Messages
a) Distress messages, distress calls, and distress traffic (MAY DAY).

b) Urgency messages: Urgency message, including message preceded by the medical
transports signals (PAN PAN or PAN PAN MEDICAL).And securite (SECURITE,
SECURITE, SECURITE).

c) Communications relating to direction finding
d) Flight safety messages

e) Meteorological messages

f) Flight Regularity messages

504

--- Page 259 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

General Operating Procedures

Aircraft Al 235 Air India 235 Air India TOO TREE FIFE
callsign

IFLY WUN FOWer SIX
Flight levels flight level WUN AIT ZE-RO
| FL200 | light level two zero zero | _ flight evel TOO ZE-RO
Aight invel Von ZERO
Wind direction | 020 degrees wind ZE-RO TOO ZE-RO
and speed 70 knots degrees seven zero knots degrees SEVen ZE-RO knots
wind one zero zero wind WUN ZE-RO ZE-RO
18 knots degrees one eight knots degrees WUN AIT knots

SA ene

fe

210 degrees 18 wind two one zero wind TOO WUN ZE-RO
knots gusting degrees one eight knots degrees WUN AIT knots
30 knots gusting three zero knots gusting TREE ZE-RO knots

runway two three left runway TOO TREE left

0.84 Mach decimal eight four Mach DAY SEE MAL AIT
Mach number FOWer

Altimeter 984 hPa QNH nine eight four QNH NINer AIT FOWer

Frequencies 128.3 MHz one two eight decimal WUN TOO AIT DAY SEE
three MAL TREE

135.75 MHz one three five decimal WUN TREE FIFE DAY SEE
seven five MAL SEVen FIFE

coeo la FIFE SIK POWer TREE

505

AIR REGULATIONS

Transmission of Time:

When transmitting time, only the
minutes of the hour are normally
required. However, the hour should be
included if there is any possibility of
confusion.

Time checks shall be given to the
nearest half minute. Coordinated
Universal Time (UTC) is to be used at
all times, unless specified. 2400 hours
designates midnight, the end of the
day, and 0000 hours the beginning of
the day.

Phrase

Time Statement

0920 (9:20 A.M.) TOO ZE-RO
or ZE-RO NIN-er TOO ZE-RO

1643 (4:43 P.M.) FOW-er TREE
or WUN SIX FOW-er TREE

175321
(5:53:21 P.M.) FIFE TREE AND A
HALF
or WUN SEVEN FIFE
TREE AND A HALF

Meaning

“I hereby indicate the separation between
portions of the message.”

To be used where there is no clear distinction
between the text and other portions of the
message.

506

--- Page 260 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

Phrase

CONTACT:

CHANGING TO

CLIMB

CORRECTION:

Meanit

When transferring to a pilot-to-controller
channel: Aircraft: CHANGING TO...
(air traffic services unit concerned)

“Authorized to proceed under the conditions

CLEARED:

specified.

“Climb to a FL, Altitude or Height.”

“An error has been made in this transmission

(or message indicated).
The correct version is..”

507

AIR REGULATIONS

Phrase Meaning

DISREGARD:

HOW DO YOU READ:

“What is the readability of my trans- mission?”

After landing:
Aircraft: LANDED ... (location) . . . (time)

MONITOR: “Listen out on (frequency).”

Note: The phrase “GO AHEAD” has been deleted. In its place the use of the calling
aeronautical station’s call sign followed by the answering aeronautical stations s
call sign shall be considered the invitation to proceed with transmission by the
Station calling.

508

--- Page 261 ---

COMMUNICATIONS AIR REGULATIONS

Meaning

Phrase Meaning

Tf, in checking the correctness of a read back,
an operator notices incorrect items, he shall

NEGATIVE, I SAY AGAIN: transmit the words “NEGATIVE I SAY
AGAIN” at the conclusion of the read back
followed by the correct version of the items
concerned.

SAY AGAIN: “Repeat all, or the following part, of your last
SAY AGAIN...(item), SAY transmission.”

AGAIN all after, SAY AGAIN

all before, SAY AGAIN all

between...and...

STANDBY: “Wait and I will call you.”
The caller would normally re-establish
contact if the delay is lengthy. STANDBY is
not an approval or denial.

“My transmission is ended, and I expect a
response from you.”
Not normally used in VHF communications

READ BACK: ‘Repeat all, or the specified part, of this
message back to me exactly as received.”

“g) As a request: Communication is difficult.
Please send every word, or group of words,
twice.”

REPORT: “Pass me the following information...”

b) As information: “Since communication is
difficult, every word, or group of words,
in this message will be sent twice.”

509 510

--- Page 262 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

CALL SIGNS FOR AERONAUTICAL STATIONS:

=

Area Control Centre ONTROL

Upper/Lower Control Area UPPER/LOWER CONTROL

Approach Control APPROACH

Approach Control Radar/ APPROACH RADAR/
Area Control Radar CONTROL RADAR

Aerodrome Control TOWER
Surface Movement Control GROUND
Radar (in general) RADAR
Precision Approach Radar PRECISION
Direction-finding Station HOMER
Flight Information Service INFORMATION
Clearance Delivery DELIVERY
Apron Control APRON
Company Dispatch DISPATCH
Aeronautical Station RADIO
Flow Control FLOW

READ BACK AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT REQUIREMENTS

Read Back Requirements:

The flight crew shall read back to the air traffic controller safety-related parts of
the clearances and instructions which are transmitted by voice. Information and items
not included below may be acknowledged by Aircraft call sign or by an abbreviated
read back.

QNH is always read back. Following items shall always be read-back:

a) ATC route clearance;
b) Clearances and instructions to enter, land on, take off on, hold short of, cross
taxi and back track on any runway; and

511

AIR REGULATIONS

c) Runway-in-use, altimeter settings, SSR codes, level instructions, heading
and speed instructions and, whether issued by the controller or contained in
ATIS broadcast, transition levels.

Transfer of Communication

An aircraft will normally be advised by the appropriate aeronautical station to
change from one radio frequency to another in accordance with agreed procedures.

In the absence of such advice, the aircraft shall notify the aeronautical station
before such a change takes place. Aircraft flying in controlled airspace must obtain
permission from the controlling authority before changing frequency.

An aircraft may be instructed to standby on a frequency when it is intended
that the ATSU will initiate communications, and to monitor a frequency on which
information is being broadcast.

Test procedures including readability scale :

All radio transmissions for test purposes shall be of the minimum duration
necessary for the test and shall not continue for more than 10 seconds. The recurrence
of such transmissions shall be kept to the minimum necessary for the test.

When the tests are made, the following readability scale should be used:

Unreadable

Readable now and then

Readable but with difficulty
Readable
Perfectly readable

a) Character corresponding to the registration marking VTEJP OR
of the aircraft. CESSNA VTEJP

b) The telephony designator of the aircraft operating
agency, followed by the last four characters of the AIRINDIA TEJP
registration marking of the aircraft.

c) The telephony designator of the aircraft operating AIRINDIA 809
agency, followed by the flight identification.

After satisfactory communication has been established, and provided that no confusion
is likely to occur, aircraft call signs may be abbreviated as follows:

512

--- Page 263 ---

COMMUNICATIONS
a) The first character of the registration and at VIP OR
least the last two characters of the call sign. CESSNA VJP
b) The telephony designator of the aircraft operating
agency, followed by at least the last two AIRINDIA JP
characters of the call sign.
c) The telephony designator of the aircraft operating No abbreviated
agency, followed by the flight identification. form

RADAR PROCEDURAL PHRASEOLOGY

Radar Identification of Aircraft

An aircraft must be identified before it can be provided with a radar service.
However, the act of identifying aircraft is not a service in itself and pilots should not
assume that they are receiving a radar service, particularly when they are flying
outside controlled airspace. When a controller has identified an aircraft he will inform
the pilot, according to the circumstances, of the following:

° That the aircraft is identified, and

° Of the position of the aircraft.

The pilot will be warned if identification is lost, or about to be lost, and appropriate
instructions given.
Secondary Surveillance Radar Phraseology:

The pilot must respond to SSR instructions, reading back specific settings.

Radar Service:

Where it is not self-evident pilots will normally be informed by the controller
when they are under radar control, advisory or information service.

Radar Vectoring:
Aircraft may be given specific vectors to fly in order to establish separation. Pilots
may be informed of the reasons for radar vectoring.

It may be necessary for a controller to know the heading of an aircraft as separation
can often be established by instructing an aircraft to continue on its existing heading.

A controller may not know the aircrafts heading but does require the aircraft to
fly a particular heading.

When vectoring is complete, pilots will be instructed to resume their own
navigation, given position information and appropriate instructions as necessary.

Occasionally an aircraft may be instructed to make a complete turn (known as
an orbit or a 360 degree turn) or given a heading, for delaying purposes or to achieve a
required spacing behind preceding traffic.

513

AIR REGULATIONS

Traffic Information and Avoiding Action Phraseology: Whenever practicable,
information regarding traffic on a possible conflicting path should be given in the
following form:

a) Relative bearing of the conflicting traffic in terms of the 12 hour clock; or, if
the aircraft under service is established in a turn, the relative position of the
conflicting traffic in relation to cardinal points i.e. northwest, south etc.;

b) Distance from the conflicting traffic;
c) Direction of flight of the conflicting traffic; and

d) Relative speed of the conflicting traffic or the type of aircraft and level if this is
known.

Relative movement should be described by using one of the following terms as
applicable:

closing, converging, parallel, same direction, opposite direction, diverging, overtaking,
crossing left to right, crossing right to left; (if level is known) — 1000 above/below.

The controller will inform the pilot when the conflict no longer exists.

Avoiding action to be taken by the pilot is given when the controller considers
that an imminent risk of collision will exist if action is not taken immediately,

RELEVANT WEATHER INFORMATION TERMS (VFR)

Aerodrome Weather

A pilot may obtain weather through many sources such as request from ATC,
Meteorological offices, ATIS, Volmet etc.

Current Weather Message (METAR,SPECI and TREND) and Forecasts:
METAR: Aviation Routine weather report
SPECI: Aviation selected special weather report.
TREND: Expected changes in next two hours.
TAF: Aerodrome forecast.
ROFOR: Route forecast.

SIGMET Information: Information issued by a meteorological watch office
concerning the occurrence or expected occurrence of specified en-route weather
phenomena which may affect the safety of aircraft operations.

AIRMET Information: Information issued by a meteorological watch office
concerning the occurrence or expected occurrence of specified en-route weather
phenomena which may affect the safety of low-level aircraft operations and which was
not already included in the forecast issued for low-level flights in the flight information
region concerned or sub-area thereof.

514

--- Page 264 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

Clouds are reported as follows:

Few at 2000, Scattered at five hundred , scattered cumulonimbus at one thousand,
broken at two thousand five hundred .

In the above example few equates 1-2 octas scattered equates to 3 or 4 Octas , broken
equates to 5— 7 Octas and overcast means 8 octas.

CAV-OK: When the visibility is 10 km or more, there is no cloud below 1500
m (5000 ft) or below the highest minimum sector altitude, whichever is greater, and
no cumulonimbus, and there is no precipitation, thunder storm, shallow fog or low
drifting snow, the term “CAVOK’ is used.

Format: METAR,SPECI and TREND:

VIDP 070200Z 12003KT 2000 BR SKC 10/08 Q1013 NOSIG

Delhi weather at 0200 on 07(date) surface wind 120 deg 03 kts visibility 2000
mts mist sky clear temp 10deg Celsius dew point 08 deg Celsius.QNH 1013.
Trend no significant change.

VOBG 070030Z 12003KT 4000 HZ BKN004 18/16 Q1014 TEMPO 3000.

Bangaluru weather at 0030 on 07 (date) surface wind 120 deg 08 kts visibility
4000 mts in haze clouds 5-7 octa at 4000 temp 18 deg Celsius dew point 16 deg
Celsius.QNH 1014. Trend vis expected to decrease to 3000 mts.

Runway Visual Range (RVR)/Visibility/Absolute Minimum:

When transmitting the runway visual range the abbreviation RVR will be used
without using the phonetic word for each letter, e.g. RVR runway 27, 800.The runway
designator may be omitted if there is no possibility of confusion.

Where instrumented runway visual range (IRVR) observations are available,
more than one reading may be transmitted.

Air /Ground Communications.

Air/ Ground communication between aircraft and Indian ATS units are provided
on channels given below:

>  Air/Ground (Voice) over High Frequency (HF) Radio.

>  Air/Ground (Voice) over Very High Frequency (VHF) Radio.
> Air/Ground (Voice) over Ultra High Frequency (UHF) Radio.
>

Remote Controlled Air — Ground communication (RCAG) — For the extended
range of VHF/UHF Radio.

ADS-CPDLC Service is available at Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and Chennai.

Vv

515

AIR REGULATIONS

Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS).

ATIS is available.in almost all airports in India. This broadcast is related to the
terminal aerodrome and is continuous and repetitive.

Data Link — ATIS (D-ATIS) service is provided through Pre-FANS Data link.
Please refer chapter 5 for details.

WEATHER BROADCAST

Voice Weather Broadcast (VOLMET)

Meteorological aerodrome reports for certain aerodromes are broadcast on
specified HF frequencies. The callsign of the VOLMET, frequency, operating hours,
aerodromes contained within the group, and contents are published in the AIP. Volmet
is presently broadcast by Mumbai and Kolkata stations on HF frequencies.

The content of a VOLMET broadcast is as follows:

» Aerodrome identification (e.g. Mumbai/ Kolkata)
» Surface wind

» Visibility (Note 1)

» RVR Gf applicable) (Note 1)

» Weather

» Cloud (Note 1)

» Temperature

» QNH

» Trend (if applicable)

Data Link VOLMET (D-VOLMET) service is provided through Pre-FANS Data
link. Non essential words such as surface wind, visibility etc. are not spoken.

DISTRESS AND URGENCY PROCEDURES

Frequencies : Distress traffic shall normally be maintained on the frequency
on which such traffic was initiated until it is considered that better assistance can be
provided by transferring that traffic to another frequency. Any other freq shall be used
to establish contact with any land/mobile or direction finding station.

° 121.5/248 MHz: International VHF/UHF distress frequency.
° 2182 KHz: International distress frequency. (MF band).
° 500 KHz: International Maritime distress frequency.

e Special Purpose SSR Codes are 7700 (Emergency), 7600 (Radio Failure) and 7500
(Hijack or Other Act of Violence)

° ELT Transmissions are on 121.5 Mhz, 243 Mhz and 406 Mhz

516

--- Page 265 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

For further details on Distess and Urgency procedures please refer Chapter 4, Rules of
the Air.

Interception Communications: See chapter 4, Rules of the Air.
IFR Communications

The procedures specified above for VFR flights are equally applicable to IFR
flights. IFR flights will maintain two way communications with ground in all classes
of airspaces.

An IFR flight operating outside controlled airspace shall maintain listening watch
and establish two way communications with ATS unit providing Flight Information
Service.

Wake Turbulence:

Aircraft in the heavy wake turbulence category shall include the word “HEAVY”
immediately after the aircraft call sign in the initial call to each ATSU. The purpose
of this call is to confirm the aircraft type and/or wake turbulence category is the same
as that stated on the flight progress strip. For the A380 the word “SUPER” is to be
included after the call sign on initial contact. :

Level Reporting:

All messages relating to an aircrafts climb or descent to a HEIGHT (QFE) or
ALTITUDE (QNH) are given in whole numbers. Furthermore, the initial message
in any such RTF exchange will also include the appropriate QFE or QNH. When
transmitting messages containing flight levels (1013.2 hPa) each digit shall be
transmitted separately.

Once having been given an instruction to climb or descend, a further overriding
instruction may be given to a pilot.

Content of the Voice Position Reports:
e _ aircraft identification

* position

*« time

¢ flight level or altitude

¢ next position and time over
* — ensuing significant point.

Routine Air Reports:

Pilots shall give the following meteorological information once in each FIR along
with position report at designated MET reporting points on international and national
ATS routes.

517

AIR REGULATIONS

Meteorological Information:
e air temperature

* — wind direction

* wind speed

¢ turbulence

¢ aircraft icing

° humidity (if available).
Special Air Reports:

Aircraft shall make routine air reports at the designated MET reporting points on
designated ATS routes and special observations whenever requested by a meteorological
office for specific observation or whenever encountered following weather phenomenon:

moderate to severe turbulence,
severe icing,

hail,

cumulonimbus clouds,

low level wind shear

VV VVV Vv

any meteorological condition in the opinion of the pilot in command is likely to
affect aircraft operation..

Contents:
> Call Sign, Position, Time, Level

>» Special Met Conditions

COMMUNICATION FAILURE PROCEDURE
Please refer chapter 4 Rules of the Air.
General Principles of VHF propagation and allocation of frequencies :

Wave energy is of a continuous nature in that it consists of many waves, one following
the other at regular intervals, with wave cycle repeating itself over and over again as the
wave motion passes a given point. A cork floating on water would move up and down as the
water waves pass. Note that the water itself does not move out horizontally with waves.

Wave motion can be discussed in fairly simple terms, the main ones being:
* Wavelength(): the length of one single wave (or of one complete cycle); it is
also the distance traveled by the wave during transmission of one cycle;

e Frequency(F): the number of completed waves (or cycles) passing a point in
one second;

¢ Amplitude: the distance from one extremity of the oscillation to the other,
commonly referred to as ‘peak to peak’,

518

--- Page 266 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

1 c

F as F= 3

Where C= 3x10° m/ sec (speed of em waves’ light) higher the wavelength,
lower the frequency and vise versa.

1 cycle= 1HZ 1km= 1000 m
3
1000 HZ = 1 KHZ= 10° HZ 1m=100em

1000 KHZ = 1MHZ= 10°HZ,
1000 MHZ=1GHZ=10°HZ 1lcm=10mm

Polarisation: In an E.M. wave two component i.e. electrical and magnetic
component travel perpendicular to each other in a direction which is mutually
perpendicular to both. The direction in which electrical component lies is called
direction of polarization.

Polar Diagram: It gives aerial characteristics of a transmitter or a receiver. For
a transmitter its drawn up to a distance where, signal strength reduces up to 50% of
transmission.

5: [> Secondary Surveillance Radar

‘eLobes Horizontal Polar Diagram

519

AIR REGULATIONS

Modulation: Process of super imposing audio frequency or information on to
carrier wave is called modulation.

Modulation is of 4 types:-

G) Amplitude Gi) Frequency Gii) Pulse (iv) Phase
Properties of Radio Waves:
G) _E.M. waves travel at the speed of 3 x10° m/s

Gi) They get refracted, reflected, diffracted and attenuated during their propagation
(attenuation lessening of amplitude in time).

ii) Their direction and velocity both change while passing from one medium to other.

While passing from medium of lower density to higher density they bend towards
the normal and vice- versa. They always bend towards the denser medium.

Band Frequency Wavelength Wavelength

Range Range Denomination
VLF-Very Low Frequency | 3-30 KHz 100 km - 10 km | Myriametric
LF~ Low Frequency 30 — 300 KHz 10km-1km Kilometric

MF- Medium Frequency 300 KHz—-3 MHz| 1km-100km | Hectometric
HF- High Frequency 3-30 MHz 100 m-10m Decametric

VHF- Very High Frequency | 30 — 30 MHz 10m-1m Metric
UHF-Ultra High Frequency| 300 MHz - 3 GHz| 1m-10cm Decimetric

SHF-Super High Frequency] 3 — 30 GHz 10cm—1cm Centimetric
(Microwave

EHF- 30 — 300 GHz lom-1mm Millimetric
Extremely High Frequency

520

--- Page 267 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

Propagation of Radio Waves
EM waves travel from a transmitter to a receiver in two ways, i.e.

G@) Ground Waves

Gi) Sky Waves
Ground Wave: A wave received either directly from transmitter or after reflection
from ground is called a ground wave.

Sky Wave: A wave received at receiver after getting refracted from atmosphere
Gonosphere).

Frequency Range . Frequency Band

Decca 70 to 130 KHz
Loran C 100 KHz

ADF 190 to 1750 KHz

HF Communications | 2 to 25 MHz

ILS Markers 75 MHz

ILS Localiser 108.1 to 111.95 MHz
VOR 108.0 to 117.95 MHz
VHF Communications | 118 to 187 MHz

ILS Glidepath 829.15 to 335.0 MHz
DME 960 to 1213 MHz

SSR 1030 and 1090 MHz

GPS 1575.42 MHz (L1)
1227.6 MHz (L2)

Satcome (Inmarsat) 1500 to 1600 MHz
(Aircraft to Satellite)
4000 to 6000 MHz
(Satellite to Ground)

Radio Altimeter 4200 to 4400 MHz
Weather Radar 9375 MHz
MLS 5031 to 5091 MHz

ATC Surveillance 600 to 1300 MHz
Radars

ATC Ground 10 to 16 GHz
Manoeuvre Radar

521

AIR REGULATIONS

VLF, LF are absorbed by layers.VHF and above pass through the layers.Part
of MF and HF are reflected back.

VLF
| More range in ground wave
MF
| Sky wave
HF
VHF
UHF Line of sight
SHF

EHF
1. Tx Power: Higher the transmission power, more is range. Hence to
double the range, power is to be increased 4 times.

Range a V Txpower

2. LOS (range)= 1.25 ( VheightofTlx + V HtofRx)
Ht = feet Range = nm

Required Communication Performance: The RCP concept characterizes
the performance required for communication capabilities that support ATM functions
without reference to any specific technology and is open to new technology. This
approach is essential to evolving operational concepts using emerging technologies. An
ATM function is an individual operational component of air traffic services. Examples
of ATM functions include the application of separation between aircraft, the re-routing
of aircraft, and the provision of flight information.

The number attached to your Required Communications Performance (RCP) is
the number of seconds it takes for an instruction to travel from the ground to you and
your acknowledgement back to the ground.

Controller Pilot Data Link Communications (CPDLC): CPDLC is a two-way
data-link system by which controllers can transmit non urgent ‘strategic messages to
an aircraft as an alternative to voice communications. The message is displayed on a
flight deck visual display.

When communicating with an aircraft that is operating within airspace beyond
the range of DCPC VHF voice communication, CPDLC is available, and local ATC
procedures do not state otherwise, the controller and flight crew would normally chose
CPDLC as the means of communication.

The controller and flight crew would use voice as an alternative means of
communication (e.g. VHF, HF or SATVOICE direct or via a radio operator). However,

522

--- Page 268 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

in any case, the controller and flight crew will determine the communication medium
that they deem to be the most appropriate at any given time.

Messages from an aircraft to ATC may follow a standard format or may be free-
text. Messages from a controller normally follow a standard format. Response is
required to most messages.

Voice and data link shall co-exist as a means of -ATS communication.
Implementation of CPDLC is intended as a supplementary means of communication
to the use of voice communication.

CPDLC shall only be used in the context of non-time-critical communications.
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS).

Supports automatic reporting by the Aircraft Flight Management System (FMS)
of aircraft position, intent Information and Meteorological Information (Spot wind
and Temperature). The FMS reports the required information in accordance with
parameters selected by the ground system. Messages will be transferred by VHF and
satellite data links.

ADS/CPDLC is integrated with Flight Data Processing system (FDPS) at Chennai,
Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata. ADS-CPDLC Service is available through FANS-1A Data
Link. All aircrafts aided with this facility shall login 10 min prior to entering the
‘concerned FIR.

523

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

What does QDR mean?

A) Magnetic heading to the station (no wind)
B) _ True bearing from the station

C) Magnetic bearing from the station

If you are requested to report your height, to which Q-code-setting would you

refer?

A) QFE

B) OQNH

C) QBI

Which Q-code is used to report altitude?
A) QFF

B) QNJ

C) QNH

What does ATIS mean?

A) Automated Termination Information Service
B) Automatic Traffic Information Service
C) Automatic Terminal Information Service

What is the Q-code for “magnetic heading to the station (no wind)”?

A) QDM
B) QNE
C) QTE
What does CTR mean?

A) CONTOL REGION
B) CONTROL ZONE
C) CONTROL AREA

What is the Q-code for “true bearing from the station”?

A) QTE
B) QDR
Cc) QDM

524

--- Page 269 ---

10.

11,

12.

13.

14.

COMMUNICATIONS
What is the Q-code for “magnetic bearing from the station”?
A) QDM
B) QTE
Cc) QDR

QNH is the Q-code to indicate:

A) The atmospheric pressure referred to the highest obstacle located on the
surface of an aerodrome.

B) The atmospheric pressure measured at the aerodrome reference point (ARP).

C) The altimeter sub-scale setting to obtain elevation when on the ground.

What does QDL mean?

A) _ lintend to ask you for a series of bearings.
B) True heading to the station (no wind).

C) True bearing from the station.

What does QNE mean?

A) What indication will my altimeter give on landing at ... (place) at ... hours, my
sub-scale being set to 1013.2 millibars (29.92 inches)?

B) What shouid | set on the subscale of my altimeter so that the instrument would
indicate its height above the reference elevation being used?

C) What should | set on the subscale of my altimeter so that the instrument would
indicate its elevation if my aircraft were on the ground at your station?

A radio direction finding station will use the following Q code to pass a true
heading (no wind) to an aircraft to head for that station:

A) Quy.
B) QGE.
C) QDM.

The order of priority of the following messages in the aeronautical mobile
service is:

A) Meteorological message, direction finding message, flight regularity message
B) Distress message, flight safety message, urgency message

C) Distress message, urgency message, direction finding message

What is the correct way of transmitting the number 3500 when indicating an
altitude or an height?

A) — Three thousand five hundred

B) Three five zero zero

C) Three five double zero

525

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

AIR REGULATIONS

During the transmission of numbers containing a decimal point:

A) The term Decimal can be omitted if no chance of misunderstandings exists
B) The term Decimal must always be transmitted

C) The term Decimal must be spoken only if followed by three digits

The time is 9:20 A.M. What is the correct way of transmitting this time if there
is no possibility of confusion about the hour?

A) Nine twenty A.M.

B) Twozero

C) Twenty

Which phrase shall be used if you want to say: AN ERROR HAS BEEN MADE IN
THIS TRANSMISSION (or message indicated). THE CORRECT VERSION IS:

A) QNH 1017, negative QNH 1016

B) QNH 1017, correction QNH 1016

C) QNH 1017, negative | say again 1016

A message preceded by the phrase TRANSMITTING BLIND DUE RECEIVER
FAILURE shall be transmitted:

A) On the regional guard frequency.

B) On the international emergency frequency.

C)  Onthe frequency presently in use.

Which phraseology is to be used to ask the control tower for permission to taxi
on a runway in the.direction opposite to that in use?

A) “To enter back runway”

B) “Backtrack clearance”

C) “Request backtrack on runway”

Which phrase shall be used if you want to say:” Yes”:

A) _ Affirm

B) Affirmative

C) Roger

The phrase used by ATC to instruct you to listen out on a frequency is:
A) MONITOR

B) REPORT

C) LISTEN

526

--- Page 270 ---

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

COMMUNICATIONS

What is the radiotelephony call sign for the aeronautical station providing
surface movement control of aircraft on the manoeuvring area:

A) TOWER
B) GROUND
C) CONTROL

What is the radiotelephony call sign for the aeronautical station providing
approach control radar departures:

A) RADAR APPROACH

B) APPROACH

C) APPROACH RADAR

The initial call from an aircraft, callsign AIR INDIA 285 weighing more than than
136 tonnes would be:

A) AIR INDIA 285 HEAVY

B) HEAVY AIR INDIA 285

C) AIR INDIA 285

On the readability scale what does “Readability 3” mean:
A) Readable but with difficulty

B) Loud and clear

C) No problem to understand

A test call shall not continue for more than:
A) 8 seconds.

B) 12 seconds.

C) 10 seconds.

King air VT-ABC receives the following instruction:”V-BC climb straight ahead

until 2500feet before turning right, wind 270 degrees 6 knots, cleared for take-

off’. What is the correct read back:

A) _ Straight ahead, 2500 feet right turn, wind west 6 knots, cleared for take-off,
V-BC

B) Straight ahead, at 2500 feet right turn, cleared for take-off, V-BC

C) Wilco, cleared for take-off, V-BC

Which elements of instructions or information shall always be read back?

A) _ Runway in use, altimeter settings, SSR codes, level instructions, heading and
speed instructions

B) Runway-in-use, visibility, surface wind, heading instructions, altimeter settings

C) Time check, runway in use, altimeter settings, level instructions, SSR codes

527

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

AIR REGULATIONS

When the term “Overcast” is used in an aviation routine weather report
(METAR), the amount of clouds covering the sky is:

A) No clouds but poor ground visibility

B) 100%

C) 50% or more

What is the correct way of expressing visibility?
A) _ Visibility 1.2 nautical miles

B) Visibility 1200 feet

C) Visibility 1200 metres

When the term “Cavok” is used in an aviation routine weather report (METAR),
the values of visibility and clouds are:

A) _ Visibility 10 km or more, no clouds below 5000 feet/GND

B) _ Visibility more than 8 km, no clouds below 3000 feet/GND

C) _ Visibility 10 km or more, no clouds below 1500 feet/GND

When the term “Broken” is used in an aviation routine weather report (METAR),
the amount of clouds covering the sky is:

A)  5to7octas

B)  8octas below 10000 feet

C) Noctouds below 5000 feet

When the term “Scattered” is used in an aviation routine weather report
(METAR), the amount of clouds covering the sky is:

A) No clouds below 5000 feet

B) Half or less than half (3 or 4 octas)

C) More than half but less than overcast (5 to 7 octas)

An aircraft station fails to establish radio contact with an aeronautical station
on the designated frequency. What action is required by the pilot:

A) Return to the airport of departure

B) Land at the nearest airport without an ATC unit

C) Attempt to establish contact with the station on an alternative frequency

In the event that a pilot is required to make a blind transmission, this should be
made:

A) During VFR flights only

B) Twice on the designated frequency

C) Only once on the designated frequency

528

--- Page 271 ---

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

COMMUNICATIONS

Distress is defined as:

A) — Acondition concerning the attitude of an aircraft when intercepting the localizer
during an ILSapproach

B) Acondition concerning the safety of a person on board or within sight and
requiring immediateassistance

C) —Acondition of being threatened by serous and/or imminent danger and requiring
immediate assistance

Under which of the following circumstances shall an aircraft squawk 7700?
A) _ Indistress

B) When following a SID

C) When passing the transition level

An aircraft in distress shall send the following signal by radiotelephony:
A) URGENCY, URGENCY, URGENCY

B) DETRESFA, DETRESFA, DETRESFA

C) MAYDAY, MAYDAY, MAYDAY

The frequency used for the transmission of a “MAYDAY” call shall be:
A) _ The frequency currently in use

B) Any frequency at pilot’s discretion

C) The distress frequency 121.5 MHz

An urgency call content is to be as follows:

A) PAN PAN PAN, aircraft identification, the intention of the person in command,
heading, height, position.

B) PAN PANPAN (on 121,5 MHz). present position, heading aircraft, identification,
the intention of the person in command, the identification of the station being
called.

C) PAN PAN PAN (on the frequency in use), name of station addressed, the nature
of the urgency condition, the intention of the person in command.

An “Automatic Terminal Information Service” provides:
A) _ Information concerning en-route weather phenomena which may effect the
safety of aircraft operation

B) Routine information to arriving and departing aircraft by means of continuous
and repetitive broadcast

C) Weather reports relating a specific number of aerodromes located within a
flight information region (FIR)

529

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

47.

AIR REGULATIONS

When flying on a SW heading at 3500 feet you would report your heading and
level as:

A) HEADING 225 AT THREE THOUASAND FIVE HUNDRED

B) SOUTHWEST AT THREE FIVE ZERO ZERO

C) HEADING 045 AT THREE THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED

What is the radiotelephony call sign for the aeronautical station indicating area
control centre (no radar):

A) _ ...CENTRE

B) — ..CONTROL

C) ..APPROACH

What is the radiotelephony call sign for the aeronautical station indicating
approach control radar arrivals:

A) — ..ARRIVAL

B) _...RADAR

C)  ..APPROACH

ABLIND TRANSMISSION is a transmission:

A) Where the transmitter is unable to see the receiver.

B) The transmitter of the called station is not functioning. a 7

C) From one station to another when there is no communication but where it is
believed that the caller station is able to receive the transmission.

To indicate that he is no longer occupying the active runway a pilot shall report
to the controller:

A) Runway free

B) Clear of runway s

C) Runway vacated

An aircraft encountering radio communication failure on an IFR flight in IMC is

assumed to:

A) Execute a VMC approach at the nearest suitable aerodrome _

B) Proceed in accordance with the current flight plan to the designated navigation
aid serving the destination aerodrome

C) _ Divert to the most suitable aerodrome according to the route of flight

530

--- Page 272 ---

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54,

COMMUNICATIONS

An aircraft encountering radio communication failure on an IFR flight in IMC
has to commence descent over the designated navigation aid serving the
destination aerodrome (no EAT received):

A) 5 minutes after the last expected approach time acknowledged

B) After 3 minutes, if an expected approach time is not acknowledged

C) At, or as close to, the ETA resulting from the current flight plan

A protected medical transport is identified by the prefix:
A) _ PAN PAN PAN PAN PAN PAN

B) AIRAMBULANCE

C) PAN PAN MEDICAL

Which of the following statements is correct?

A) The urgency communications have priority over all the other communications

B) The urgency communications have priority over all the other communications,
except distress

C) ATC clearances have the same priority as urgency communications

The VOLMET broadcasts include information about:
A)  METARs for selected airfields.

B) Arrival and departure details for selected airfields.
C) _ TAFs for selected airfields.

What is the correct way of transmitting the number 13500?
A) One three five zero zero

B) One three five hundred

C) One three thousand five hundred

What, if any, is the abbreviated call sign of Air India 5345?
A) _ Air India 345

B) = Air India 45

C) No abbreviated form

The maximum theoretical range at which an aircraft at FL80 can obtain bearings
from a ground VHF facility sited at 325ft above MSL is:

A) 107NM
B) 134NM
C) 158NM

531

55.

56.

57.

58,

59.

AIR REGULATIONS

A frequency of 295 KHz would be described as:

A) HF.
B) _ short wave.
Cc) LF

In radio terms, frequency means:

A) |The number of complete waveforms passing a spot in one second.
B) The number of waveforms in one hour.

C) The length of a complete waveform in metres.

The wavelength of HF is?
A) Centimetric

B) Decemetric.

C) = Metric.

Weather radar is?
A) Centimetric
B) Decimetric
C) = Metric.

What is the wavelength and waveband of a radio aid that uses a frequency of
19 cm.

A) 15.79 Hz. ELF.
B) 1.579 Ghz. UHF
C) 1.579 Mhz VHF

532

--- Page 273 ---

COMMUNICATIONS

ANSWERS

jt [2[3i4 ts let7Tslelopny] 213 [4]
ro [a tetetatstatetelatatetetay

5 [ie [7 [ve [te [2 [a] Bll me] we LT
fete [etetelalale[elatatote tay
EILSESESESESE IEEE
re fejatatelefe[c[aletateotet a

43 [44 | 45 | 46 | 47 [48 [49 [50] 51] 2] 63 | 54 | 56 |
fea tetetstelelelatefetetetey

533

AIR REGULATIONS

534

--- Page 274 ---

20

AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT
AND INCIDENT

(ANNEX 13, Aircraft (Investigation of Accidents and
Incidents) Rules, 2017 and
CIVIL AVIATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 5 — AIR SAFETY SERIES ‘C’ PART 1)

Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation

The causes of an aircraft accident or serious incident must be identified in order to
prevent repeated occurrences. The identification of casual factors is best accomplished
through a properly conducted investigation. The Annex spells out which States may
participate in an investigation, such as the States of Occurrence, Registry, Operator,
Design and Manufacture. It also defines the rights and responsibilities of such States.

Applicability:
Unless otherwise stated, the specifications in this Annex apply to activities
following accidents and incidents wherever they occurred.

In this Annex the specifications concerning the State of the Operator apply only
when an aircraft is leased, chartered or interchanged and when that State is not the
State of Registry and if it discharges, in respect of this Annex, in part or in whole, the
functions and obligations of the State of Registry.

Provisions

e Any State which, on request, provides information, facilities or experts to the
State conducting the investigation shall be entitled to appoint an accredited
representative to participate in the investigation.

¢« The accident investigation preliminary report shall be submitted to appropriate
States and to the ICAO, in one of the working languages of ICAO.

* Upon receipt of the modification and a request by the state of occurence for
participation, the state of design and the state of manufacture shall in the case
of an accident or serious incident inform the state of occurence of the name of
its representative to be present at the investigation when the aircraft has a
maximum mass over 100000kg.

535

AIR REGULATIONS

° The government of the state in which the accident took place is responsible, under
Annex 13 of the Chicago convention for the initiation of an accident investigation.

NATIONAL PROVISIONS

Accident. An occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft which

(i) in the case of a manned aircraft, takes place between the time any person boards
the aircraft with the intention of flight until such time as all such persons have
disembarked; or

(ii) in the case of an unmanned aircraft, takes place between the time the aircraft is
ready to move with the purpose of flight until such time as it comes to rest at the
end of the flight and the primary propulsion system is shut down, in which:

a) a person is fatally or seriously injured as a result of:

¢ being in the aircraft, or

¢ direct contact with any part of the aircraft, including parts which have become
detached from the aircraft, or

e direct exposure to jet blast,

* except when the injuries are from natural causes, self-inflicted or inflicted by
other persons, or when the injuries are to stowaways hiding outside the areas
normally available to the passengers and crew; or

b) the aircraft sustains damage or structural failure which:

¢ adversely affects the structural strength, performance or flight characteristics
of the aircraft, and

¢ except for failure of engine or damage, when the damage is limited to a
single engine, (including its cowlings or accessories), to propellers, wing tips,
antennas, probes, vanes, tires, brakes, wheels, fairings, panels, landing gear
doors, windscreens, the aircraft skin (such as small dents or puncture holes),
or for minor damages to main rotor blades, tail rotor blades, landing gear, and
those resulting from hail or bird strike (including holes in the radome); or

c) the aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible.

For the purposes of this clause “fatally injured” means an injury resulting in
death within thirty days of the date of the accident. For the purpose of this clause
“aircraft is missing” means the wreckage of the aircraft has not been located when the
official s2arch has been terminated.

Serious incident. Means an incident involving circumstances indicating that
there was a high probability of an accident associated with the operation of an aircraft
under conditions as mentioned in the definition of accident given above. Examples are:

e Fires and smoke in the passenger compartment, in cargo compartments
or engine fires, even though such fires were extinguished by the use of
extinguishing agents, Events requiring the emergency use of oxygen by the
flight crew, Aircraft structural failures or engine disintegrations not classified
as an accident, Multiple malfunctions of one or more aircraft systems

536

--- Page 275 ---

AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT

seriously affecting the operation of the aircraft, Flight crew incapacitation in
flight. Collisions not classified as accidents, Fire and/or smoke in the cockpit,
Fuel quantity level or distribution situations requiring the declaration of
an emergency by the pilot, such as insufficient fuel, fuel exhaustion, fuel
starvation, or inability to use all usable fuel on board, The unintentional or,
as an emergency measure, the intentional release of a slung load or any other
load carried external to the aircraft etc.

Serious injury. An injury which is sustained by a person in an accident and

which:
a)

b)
c)

d)
e)

f)

requires hospitalization for more than 48 hours, commencing within seven
days from the date the injury was received; or

results in a fracture of any bone (except simple fractures of fingers, toes or
nose); or

involves lacerations which cause severe haemorrhage, nerve, muscle or tendon
damage; or

involves injury to any internal organ; or

involves second or third degree burns, or any burns affecting more than 5 per
cent of the body surface; or

involves verified exposure to infectious substances or injurious radiation.

Incident: in relation to an aircraft means an occurrence which takes place either
on the ground or in flight , in which

a) The aircraft suffers damage or a person associated either with the maintenance

b)
c)
d)

e)

f)
g)

or operation of aircraft, or both, suffers injury in circumstances other than
those specified in the definition of “accident”,

the aircraft makes a forced landing,

the aircraft lands at aerodrome in an un airworthy condition,

the aircraft is compelled to land at the aerodrome of departure without
completing the scheduled flight,

the aircraft lands owing to conditions which make continuance of the flight
inadvisable,

the position of the aircraft becomes “unknown for any period”, or

the safety of the aircraft or its occupants or of any other person or property is
jeopardised in any manner;

537

AIR REGULATIONS

Air Traffic Incidents :

“Air traffic incidents” is used to mean a serious occurrence related to the provisions
of air traffic services, such as:

> aircraft proximity (AIRPROX);
> serious difficulty resulting in a hazard to aircraft caused for example, by:

i)

ii)

faulty procedures

non-compliance with procedures, or

iii) failure of ground facilities

Reporting procedures (including in-flight procedures). The following are
the procedures to be followed by a pilot who is or has been involved in an incident:

a) during flight, use the appropriate air/ground frequency for reporting an incident
of major significance, particularly if it involves other aircraft, so as to permit the
facts to be ascertained immediately;

b) As

promptly as possible after landing, and in any case within 24 hours, submit

a completed Air Traffic Incident Report Form by quickest means available to
Director General of Civil Aviation (Attn: Director Air safety, HQ) with a copy to
Executive Director (ATM), Airports Authority of India, Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan,
Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi. 110003.

i)

ii)

For confirming a report of an incident made initially by radio, or for making
the initial report on such an incident if it had not been possible to report it by
radio;

For reporting an incident which did not require immediate notification at the
time of occurrence.

An initial report made by radio should contain the following information:

a)
b)
c)

d)

aircraft identification;
type of incident, e.g. aircraft proximity;

the incident; (give information as laid down in Air Traffic Incident report
form)

miscellaneous:

Investigation. In case of an accident or incident to an aircraft in the territory
of India, notwithstanding its registration, the DG, Aircraft Accident Investigation
Bureau(AAIB) shall institute an investigation into the circumstances of the accident or
incident, and shall be responsible for conducting the investigation. “DG, AAIB” means
the Director General who shall be the head of the Aircraft Accident Investigation

Bureau.

538

--- Page 276 ---

AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT

Notification. Where an accident or incident occurs to an aircraft then the pilot-
in-command of the aircraft or, if he be killed or incapacitated, the owner, the operator,
the hirer or other person on whose behalf he was in command of the aircraft, or any
relevant person, as the case may be, shall, as soon as is reasonably practicable but in
any case not later than twenty-four hours after he becomes aware of the accident or the
incident—

(a) send notice thereof to Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau and Directorate
General of Civil Aviation by the quickest means of communication available; and

(b) in the case of an accident of incident occurring in India, give information to the
District Magistrate and the Officer-in-charge of the nearest Police Station of the
accident or incident and of the place where it occurred.

The notification shall also be submitted to the Aircraft Accident Investigation
Bureau by:

(a) Aerodrome operator;
(b) Air Traffic services in-charge concerned;
(c) DG,CA, wherever applicable.

Protection of evidence, custody, removal and preservation of damaged
aircraft.

(1) In the case of an accident or a serious incident, which is required to be notified,
the Investigator-in-Charge shall have unhampered access to the wreckage
and all relevant material. and information, including flight recorders and Air
Traffic Services records, and shall have unrestricted control over it to ensure
that a detailed examination can be made without delay by authorised personnel
participating in the investigation.

(2) The aircraft and contents thereof shall not, except by a person under the authority
of the DG, AAIB, be removed or otherwise interfered with:

Provided that-

(a) the aircraft or any parts or contents thereof may be removed or interfered with
so far as may be necessary by persons authorized to conduct search and rescue
operations for the purpose of extricating persons or animals dead or alive, or
preventing the destruction of the aircraft and its contents by fire or other cause,
or preventing any damage or obstruction to the public or to air navigation or to
other transport;

(b) if the aircraft is wrecked on water, the aircraft or any parts or contents thereof

may be removed to such extent as may be necessary for bringing it or them to a
place of safety by persons authorised to conduct search and rescue operations;

(c) goods may be removed from the aircraft under the supervision and with the
concurrence of an officer of the Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau or a person
authorised by the DG, AAIB;

539

AIR REGULATIONS

@ personal luggage of passengers and crew after photography, weighing, etc. may be
removed from the aircraft under the supervision of a Police Officer, a Magistrate,
an Officer of the Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau or a person authorised
by DG, AAIB; and

(e) mails photography, weighing etc. may be removed under the supervision of a
Police Officer, a Magistrate, an Officer of the Department of Posts and Telegraphs
or an Officer of the Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau or a person authorised
by DG, AAIB.

540

--- Page 277 ---

AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT

QUESTIONS

The objective of the investigation of an accident or incident shall be the:

A) _ Prevention of accidents or incidents and to help the judges

B) Prevention of accidents or incidents and to help the manufacturers in design
C) Prevention of accidents or incidents

Which of the following, according to ICAO Annex 13, shall be entitled to appoint

an accredited representative to participate in the investigation?

A) State conducting the investigation and State of design and manufacturing

B) Al ICAO members States

C) Any State which, on request, provides information, facilities or experts to the
State conducting the investigation

The accident investigation preliminary report shail be submitted to appropriate
States and to the ICAO, in:

A) Any of the world’s major languages

B) One of the working languages of ICAO

C) The language of the investigating State

Upon receipt of the modification and a request by the state of occurence for
participation, the state of design and the state of manufacture shall in the case
of an accident or serious incident inform the state of occurence of the name of
its representative to be present at the investigation when the aircraft:

A) Has amaximum mass over 100000kg

B) Has a maximum mass over 27000kg

C) Has amaximum mass over 5700kg

Who is responsible, under Annex 13 of the Chicago convention for the initiation
of an accident investigation?

A) _ The law enforcement authorities of the state in which the aircraft is registered
B) The aircraft manufacturer

C) The government of the state in which the accident took place

541

AIR REGULATIONS

Just before arriving on the apron, taxiing inadvertently on the grass, a wheel

falls into a hole, which seriously damages the aircraft and obliges the crew to

delay departure.

A) _ This is an accident and the crew must follow the procedure relevant to this
case

B) _ This is an irregularity in the operation, the crew must inform the operator of the
delay caused by necessary repair

C) Since no physical injury has been noticed and the flight is over, the actions to
be taken are related only to insurance, to the repair man, the operator and the
persons in charge of the runways and taxiways

Where an accident or incident occurs to an aircraft in India, then the pilot-in-

command of the aircraft shall send notice thereof to:

A) _ AAIB, DGCA, DM and O-i-C of nearest police station as soon as is reasonably
practicable but in any case not later than twenty-four hours

B) AAIB, DGCA, DM and O-i-C of nearest police station as soon as is reasonably
practicable but in any case not later than forty eight hours

C) AAIB, DGCA, DM and AAI as soon as is reasonably practicable but in any
case not later than twenty-four hours

In the case of an accident the aircraft. or any parts or contents thereof may be
removed without the authority of DG/AAIB:

A) _ To look for evidence
B) If so directed by the P-i-C
C) ‘To extricate the body of a dead dog

542

--- Page 278 ---

AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

543 544

--- Page 279 ---

21

FACILITATION
(ANNEX 9 AND AIP, INDIA)

Definitions:
Cargo : Any property carried on an aircraft other than mail, stores and
accompanied or mishandled baggage.

Clearance of goods : The accomplishment of the customs formalities necessary
to allow goods to enter home use, to be exported or to be placed under another customs
procedure.

Commencement of journey: The point at which the person began his journey,
without taking into account any airport at which he stopped in direct transit, either on
a through-flight or a connecting flight, if he did not leave the direct tansit area of the
airport in question.

Commissary supplies : Items, either disposable or intended for multiple
use, that are used by the aircraft operator for provision of services during flights, in
particular for catering, and for the comfort of passengers.

Deportee : A person who had legally been admitted to a State by its authorities
or who had entered a State illegally, and who at some later time is formally ordered by
the competent authorities to leave that State.

Direct transit area: A special area established in an international airport,
approved by the public authorities concerned and under their direct supervision or
control, where passengers can stay during transit or transfer without applying for
entry to the State.

Disembarkation : The leaving of an aircraft a landing, except by crew or
passengers continuing on the next stage of the same through-flight.

Embarkation : The boarding of an aircraft for the purpose of commencing a
flight, except by such crew or passengers as have embarked on a previous stage of the
same through-flight.

International Airport : Any airport designated by the Contracting State in
whose territory it is situated as an airport of entry and departure for international air
traffic, where the formalities incident to customs, immigration, public health, animal
and plant quarantine and similar procedures are carried out.

545

AIR REGULATIONS

Lading : The placing of cargo, mail baggage or stores on board an aircraft to be
carried on a flight.

Unlading : The removal of cargo, mail, baggage or stores from an aircraft after a
landing.

The SARPs pertain specifically to facilitation of landside formalities for clearance
of aircraft and commercial traffic through the requirements of customs, immigration,
public health and agriculture authorities. The Annex is a wide-ranging document which
reflects the flexibility of ICAO in keeping pace with international civil aviation. ICAO
is recognized as being the first international body to make a real start on facilitation
by developing Standards which bind its Contracting States.

Initially, the main thrust of the Annex consisted of efforts to reduce paperwork,
standardize internationally the documents that were to accompany traffic between
States, and simplify the procedures required to clear aircraft, passengers and cargo.
It was—as it still is—recognized that delays due to cumbersome formalities must be
reduced, not just because they are unpleasant but, in practical terms, because they are
costly to all of the “customer groups” in the community and because they interfere with
the success of everyone.

ENTRY AND DEPARTURE OF AIRCRAFT

Description:

Contracting States shall adopt appropriate measures for the clearance of aircraft
arriving from or departing to another Contracting State and shall implement them in
such a manner as to prevent unnecessary delays.

In developing procedures aimed at the efficient clearance of entering or departing
aircraft, Contracting States shall take into account the application of aviation security
and narcotics control measures, where appropriate.

Purpose And Use of Aircraft Documents

Contracting States shall not require any documents, other than those provided
for in this Chapter, for the entry and departure of aircraft.

Contracting States shall not require a visa nor shall any visa or other fee be
collected in connection with the use of any documentation required for the entry or
departure of aircraft.

Subject to the technological capabilities of the Contracting State, documents for
the entry and departure of aircraft shall be accepted when presented:

a) inelectronic form, transmitted to an information system of the public authorities;
b) in paper form, produced or transmitted electronically; or
c) in paper form, completed manually following the formats depicted in Annex 9.

546

--- Page 280 ---

FACILITATION

When a particular document is transmitted by or on behalf of the aircraft operator
and received by the public authorities in electronic form, the Contracting State shall
not require the presentation of the same document in paper form.

A Contracting State requiring a General Declaration shall limit its information
requirements to the elements indicated in Annex 9. The information shall be accepted
in either electronic or paper form..

Contracting States shall not normally require the presentation of a Passenger
Manifest.

When a Contracting States require the presentation of the Cargo Manifest in
paper form, it shall accept the form shown in Annex 9.

Contracting States shall not require the presentation of a written declaration of
stores remaining on board the aircraft.

Contracting States shall not require the presentation of a list of accompanied
baggage or mishandled baggage laden on or unladén from the aircraft.

Contracting States shall not require the presentation of a written declaration of
the mail other than the form(s) prescribed in the Acts in force of the Universal Postal
Union.

Contracting States shall not require the aircraft operator to deliver to the public

authorities more than three copies of any of the above - mentioned documents at the
time of entry or departure of the aircraft.

If the aircraft is not embarking/disembarking passengers or lading/unlading
cargo, stores or mail, the relevant documents(s) shall not be required, provided an
appropriate notation is included in the General Declaration.

General Declaration

On those occasions when a General Declaration is required, the information
required shall be limited to the format given in Annexture 9. The information is
acceptable in electronic or paper form.

Entry And Departure Of Persons And Their Baggage - Entry Requirement
And Procedures For Crew And Other Operator’s Personnel

Contracting States shall establish measures, with the cooperation of aircraft
operators and airport operators, to expedite the inspection of crew members and their
baggages, as required at departure and upon arrival.

Contracting States shall facilitate and expedite the process under which aircraft
operators based in their territories can apply for Crew Member Certificates (CMCs) for
their crew members.

Note:- The CMC has developed as a card for use for identification purposes by crew
members, leaving the crew licences to serve their primary purpose of attesting to the
professional qualifications of the flight crew members.

547

AIR REGULATIONS

Contracting States should put in place procedures which will enable any crew
member issued with a Crew Member Certificate to examine and review the validity of
the data held, and to provide for correction if necessary, at no cost to the crew member.

To the extent that aircraft operators issue crew identity cards, Contracting
States should require the production of such identity documents in the format shown
below i.e. in the same layout as the visual zone of the machine readable crew member
certificate and having the capability to support machine assisted identity confirmation
and document security verification.

Contracting States should ensure that a record of each crew member's certificates
and other official identity document issued, suspended or withdrawn, is stored in an
electronic database, secure from interference and unauthorised access.

Adequate controls shall be placed on the issuance of CMCs and other official crew
identity documents to prevent fraud, for example, a background check and certification
of employment status of an applicant prior to issuance, controls on blank card stock,
and accountability requirements for issuing personnel.

Contracting States shall waive the visa requirement for arriving crew members
presenting CMCs, when arriving in a duty status on an international flight and seeking
temporary entry for the period allowed by the receiving State in order to join their next
assigned flight in a duty status.

Contracting States should waive the visa requirement for arriving crew members
presenting CMCs, when arriving on another aircraft operator or another mode of
transport and seeking temporary entry for the period allowed by the receiving State in
order to join their assigned flight in a duty status.

Contracting States shall establish measures to provide for the temporary entry
without delay into their territories, of technical personnel of foreign aircraft operators
operating to or through such territories who are urgently required for the purpose
of converting to an airworthy condition any aircraft which is, for technical reasons,
unable to continue its journey.

Contracting States should incorporate biometric data in their machine readable
travel documents in a contactless integrated circuit chip, as specified in Doc 9303,
Machine Readable Travel Documents (MRTD).

Each Contracting State should consider the introduction of Automated Border
Control (ABC) systems in order to facilitate and expedite the clearance of persons
entering or departing by air.

Contracting States utilizing ABC systems should use the information available
from the ICAO Public Key Directory (PKD) to validate eMRTDs, perform biometric
matching to establish that the passenger is the rightful holder of the document, and
query INTERPOL’s Stolen and Lost Travel Documents (SLTD) database, as well as
other border control records, to determine eligibility for border crossing.

548

--- Page 281 ---

FACILITATION

NATIONAL PROVISIONS

International flights into, from or over Indian territory shall be subjected to the
current Indian regulations relating to civil aviation and other national laws relating
to immigrations, customs, passport and health etc. These regulations correspond in all
essentials to the Standards and Recommended Practices contained in Annex 9 to the
Convention on International Civil Aviation.

Additionally every aircraft entering or leaving India must comply with regulations
relating to immigration, customs, quarantine and health as laid down by the
Government from time to time.

Aircraft flying into or departing from Indian territory shall make their first landing at,
or final departure from , an International Aerodrome . (see AIP India, AD 1.3 and AD2).
Aircraft may be permitted to land or depart from any notified customs aerodrome.

International flights are not permitted to pick up passengers/load at any place in India
and disembark/discharge at any other place in India.

_ Aircraft Document Required (Arrival/Departure)

Required by General Passenger Cargo
Declaration Manifest Manifest

Customs
Immigration

Health

No flight shall leave India without obtaining clearance of Immigration and
Customs authorities on General Declaration.

Customs Duty on aircraft

No customs duty is levied on the aircraft not registered in India which is brought
into India for purpose of a flight to or across India, which is not intended to be registered
in India and is intended to be removed from India within six months from the date of
entry, provided that the person-in-charge of the aircraft makes a written declaration to
that effect to the Customs Collector on arrival.

549

AIR REGULATIONS

GENERAL DECLARATION

(Outward/Inward)

Operator
Marks of Nationality and Registration’ .

Departure from ...

FLIGHT ROUTING
(“Place” Columan always to list origin, every en-route stop and destination)

PLACE TOTAL NUMBER NUMBER OF PASSENGERS
ON THIS STAGE**

Departure Place : eae
Embarking : .......
Through on same flight :

Arrival Place :
Disembarking .
Through on same flight : wee

Declaration of Health* For Official use only

Persons on board with illnesses other than airsickness or the effects of accidents

(including persons withsysmptomsorsignsofillnesssuchasrash, (ever, chills, diarrhoes)

aswellasthosecasesofillness disembarked during theflight seve

Details of each disinsecting or sanitary treatment (place, date, time, method)

during the flight. If no disinsecting has been carried out during the flight, give details

of most recent disinsecting .......ssssssecssesessseessseecesveecssaesssneesssneccssecessueecssusecssseessssseessesee
Crew member concerned

I declare that all statements and particulars contained in this General Declaration, and in any supplementary forms required
to be presented with this General Declaration, are complete, exact and true to the best of my knowledge and that all through
passengers will continue/have continued on the flight.

SIGNATURE

Authorised Agent or pilot-in-command

PASSENGER MANIFEST
Operator ...

Marks of Nationality and Registration* .. Flight No. ....

Point of embarkation... + Point of disembarkation .assssssscsssessseccsesesnsecsssnecenseesseesenneeccneessseecensee

sores ty opessoreny srabeaceny

550

--- Page 282 ---

FACILITATION

CARGO MANIFEST

Operator
Marks of Nationality and Registration’ Flight No. .....

Point of lading

Air Waybill Number of Nature of goods* For use by operator only For official use only
Number packages

CUSTOMS REQUIREMENTS

Incoming Passengers

All the goods imported into India by air are subject to clearance by Customs
authorities, except the goods within the limits of duty free allowance. For the purpose
of Customs Clearance of arriving passengers, a two channel system has been adopted
i.e. Green Channel for passengers not having any dutiable goods and Red Channel for
passengers having dutiable goods.

Regulation for the airline crew

Crew member of aircraft are subject to submit correct declaration before customs
authorities with respect to the currency gold ornaments and electronic goods etc. in
their possession on arrival as well as departure.

Outgoing Passengers

All the passengers leaving India by Air are subject to clearance by Custom
Authorities. Only bonafide baggage is allowed to be cleared by passengers. There is
a procedure prescribed whereby the passengers leaving India can take the export
certificate for the various high value items as well as jewellery from the Customs
authorities.

Regulation for Transit Passengers

Transit passengers are kept in Customs area and Customs authorities keep watch
on such passengers that they should not hand over anything to any other person. They
are also not allowed to go outside the airport building.

Customs requirements concerning Cargo and other articles

Goods for export by air (including unaccompanied baggage) are required to be
presented for examination to the Customs authorities sufficiently in advance for such
goods to be examined before the departure of the aircraft on which they are consigned.
As a general rule, such presentation should be made not less than four working hours
before the scheduled time of departure.

551

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

The ICAO Annex which deals with entry and departure of persons and their
baggage, cargo and other articles on international flights is:

A) Annex 9
B) Annex 15
C) Annex8

In case of aircraft registered in other Contracting States, which are not engaged
in schedule international services, and which are making flights across the
territory of a Contracting State or stopping for non traffic purposes, such
Contracting State shall accept the information contained in a flight plan as
adequate advance notification. This information is to be received:

A) Atleast 2 hours in advance of arrival

B) Atleast 4 hours in advance of arrival

C) Atleast 1 hours in advance of arrival

A contracting state which continues to require the presentation of a cargo

manifest shall, apart from the information indicated in the heading of the format

of the cargo manifest, not require more than the following item(s):

A) _ The airway bill number and the number of packages related to the airway bill
number

B) The airway bill number; the number of packages related to each airway bill
number and the nature of the goods

C) The airway bill number and the nature of goods

An aircraft which is not engaged in scheduled international air services and
which is making a flight to or through any designated airport of a Contracting
State and is admitted temporarily free of duty shall be allowed to remain within
that State without security for customs duty.

A) Fora period of 12 hours

B) Fora period of 48 hours

C) Fora period to be established by that State

“hich one of the statements is correct?

A) Contracting states may not accept oral declaration of baggages

B) Contracting states shall accept an oral declaration of baggage from passengers
and crew

C) Contracting states shall accept an oral declaration of baggage only from
passengers

552

--- Page 283 ---

10.

11.

FACILITATION

An aircraft flying to another contracting state: 12.

A) _ Is liable to pay customs duty on all unused fuel and oil carried

B) Is admitted to that state temporarily free of customs duty in regard to oil and
fuel remaining only

C) Is admitted to that state temporarily free of customs duty.

Contracting states shall not require the authorized agent or pilot-in-command
to deliver to the public authorities concerned, before departure of the aircraft,

more than some copies of General Declaration, Cargo Manifest and stores list. 13.

The numbers of the copies are :
A) 2 copies of General Declarations and Cargo Manifest and one copie of a simple

stores list.
B) 2copies of General Declaration and of Cargo Manifest and of a stores list
C) 2ofeach

14.

In cases where a visitor travelling by air holds a valid passport and no visa is

required of him, contracting states

A) Shall not require him to obtain any other identity document from their consultates
or operators prior to initiate the flight

B) None of the answers are applicable

C) _ Incertain cases any other identity may be required

The documents for entry and departure of aircraft:

A) _ Has to be typewritten or produced by electronic data processing techniques
B) Are accepted in handwritten block lettering in ink

C) Are accepted at the contracting state discretion

On a general declaration form, the following data can be found:

A) _ Aircraft registration mark, flight number, date and place of departure, destination
and, number of crew and passengers

B) The nature of goods embarked on the aircraft (e.g. dangerous goods)

C) Acomplete description of payload (passengers, cargo and mail)

What is the purpose of a Crew Member’s Certificate (CMC)?

A) _ To allow flight crew to be exempted from customs, health and immigration
formalities when disembarking.

B) To permit access to the air side of an aerodrome for aircrew.

C) To provide identification of aircrew.

553

AIR REGULATIONS

What documentation is required by persons travelling by air, for entry into a

state?

A) Passport and confirmation of inclusion on the general declaration passenger
manifest

B) The same as would be required if the person arrived by ship

C) Passport, visa and any necessary health documentation (vaccination
certificates)

The crew member certificate (CMC) shall be accepted by each Contracting
State for identification purposes:

A) _ Together with a valid flight crew license.

B) None of the above.

C) Together with a valid passport.

Exceptin special circumstances determined by the public authorities concerned,

when a passenger is passing through the territory of a contracting state and

has to stay in that contracting state until the next flight for lack of facilities or

any other circumstances, the contracting state where the international airport

is located shall permit such a passenger to remain within its territory without

requiring visas prior to the arrival when

A) _ The passenger is to leave that state within two (2) days from the day of his
(her) arrival .

B) The passenger is to leave that state within one (1) day from the day of his (her)
arrival

C) The passenger is to leave that state within two (2) weeks from the day of his
(her) arrival

554

--- Page 284 ---

FACILITATION AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

Pa T2734 {ts fet 7{afelol ny] 2 | 13 [14
pataltelecl[elel[clalslalc|] es [e ja

555 556


--- Page 285 ---

22

SECURITY - SAFEGUARDING
INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION AGAINST ACTS OF
UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE

(ANNEX 17 and Aircraft (Security) Rules, 2011)

The dramatic increase in crimes of violence which adversely affected the safety of
civil aviation during the late 1960's, resulted in an Extraordinary Session of the ICAO
Assembly in June 1970. One of the resolutions of that Assembly called for specifications
in existing or new Annexes to the Chicago Convention to specifically deal with the
problem of unlawful interference, in particular with unlawful seizure of aircraft.

Annex 17 seeks to co-ordinate the activities of those involved in security
programmes. It is recognized that airline operators themselves have a primary
responsibility for protecting their passengers, assets and revenues, and therefore
States must ensure that the carriers develop and implement effective complementary
security programmes compatible with those of the airports out of which they operate.

Prior to 1985, the significant threat to civil aviation was seen as the hijacking. As
aresult, the Standards and Recommended Practices tended to focus on hijacking rather
than sabotage, in-flight attack or facility attack. By modifying existing technology and
applying agreed upon specifications and procedures, the worldwide aviation community
established a reasonably effective screening system for passengers and their carry-on
luggage. The annex was further amended to deal with reconciliation of baggage with
passengers, controls over items left behind on the aircraft by disembarking passengers,
security controls for commercial courier services and controls over cargo and mail
under certain situations.

The later Amendment includes various definitions and new provisions in relation
to the applicability of this Annex to domestic operations; international cooperation
relating to threat information; national quality control; access control; measures

557

AIR REGULATIONS

related to passengers and their cabin and hold baggage; in flight security personnel
and protection of the cockpit; code-sharing/collaborative arrangements; human factors;
and management of response to acts of unlawful interference.

Aims And Objectives

Each Contracting State shall establish an organization and develop and
implement regulations, practices and procedures to safeguard civil aviation against
acts of unlawful interference taking into account the safety, regularity and efficiency
of flights.

Each Contracting State shall ensure that such an organization and such
regulations, practices and procedures:

a) protect the safety of passengers, crew, ground personnel and the general
public in all matters related to safeguarding against acts of unlawful
interference with civil aviation; and

b) are capable of responding rapidly to meet any increased security threat.

¢ The contracting State will make provisions to ensure that an aircraft affected by
an unlawful seizure act, which has landed in their territory, would be retained,
unless its departure is justified to protect lives. A State shall take adequate
measures for the safety of passengers and crew of an aircraft which is subjected
to an act of unlawful interference, until their journey can be continued.

e When an aircraft subject to unlawful interference has landed it shall notify by
the most expeditious means of the State of registry of the aircraft and the State
of the operator of the landing and shall similarly transmit all other relevant
information to the two aforementioned States, each State whose citizens suffered
fatalities or injuries, each State whose citizens were detained as hostages, each
State whose citizens are known to be on board the aircraft and the ICAO.

e A State shall provide assistance to an aircraft subjected to an act of unlawful
seizure. This assistance includes provision of navigation aids, air traffic services,
permission to land.

¢ For the transport of potentially disruptive passengers some supplementary
safeguards are to be observed such as boarding prior to all passengers.

e When mixing or contact does take place between passengers subjected to
security control and other persons not subjected to such control after the security
screening points at airports serving international civil aviation have been passed
the passengers concerned and their cabin baggage shall be re-screened before
boarding an aircraft.

e When a member state allows police officers, security staff, bodyguards or other
agents of foreign states to carry weapons in their territory for the protection of
aircraft in flight, permission for the carriage of weapons should be conditional
upon prior notification by the state of embarkation to the foreign state in which
the weapons will be carried on the airport of arrival and notification of the pilot
in command of a decision to permit a weapon to be carried on board his aircraft.

558

--- Page 286 ---

SECURITY - SAFEGUARDING INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION
AGAINST ACTS OF UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE

NATIONAL PROVISIONS

Aircraft and airport security in India is governed by Aircraft (Security) Rules, 2011.
Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation), Bureau of Civil Aviation Security, Ministry
of Civil Aviation is the appropriate authority for the requirements of Annex 17. The
commissioner shall establish, develop, implement, maintain and review the national
civil aviation security programme consistent with the provisions of Annes-17 to the
convention to safeguard civil aviation operations against acts of unlawful interference
and threat perception taking into account the safety, regularity and efficiency of flights.
All aircraft and airports are required to comply with the instructions issued by the
Commissioner.

The Dte. of Security acts as the nodal agency of AAI to carry out its designated
functions covering AAI airports only. At individual airports, the Airport Directors are
responsible for these functions. The JVC/private airports e.g. DIAL, MIAL, CIAL,
HIAL, BIAL are responsible for Delhi, Mumbai, Cochin, Hyderabad and Bangalore
airports respectively. These airports have their own security set up to monitor and
carry out security functions.

Reporting of security accident or incident. Every aircraft operator,
aviation security group, aerodrome operator, regulated agent and owner or operator
of catering establishment shall report the security accident or security incident to
the Commissioner immediately on the occurrence of the security accident or security
incident.

Investigation of security accident or incident. The Commissioner may order
investigation of any security accident or security incident and appoint an officer not
below the rank of Assistant Commissioner of security as Inquiry Officer.

559

AIR REGULATIONS

QUESTIONS

The ICAO Annex 17 comprises rules in order to establish security measures for

passengers:

A) Checked baggage, cargo and other goods, access control and airport design

B) Cabin baggage, checked baggage, cargo and other goods, access control and
airport design

C) And baggage

A State shall take adequate measures for the safety of passengers and crew of
an aircraft which is subjected to an act of unlawful interference,

A) — Until their journey can be continued

B) During a period of investigation

C) And arrange for them to return to their country of origin

When an aircraft subject to unlawful interference has landed it shall notify by

the most expeditious means of the State of registry of the aircraft and the State

of the operator of the landing and shall similarly transmit all other relevant
information to the:

A) Two aforementioned States, each State whose citizens suffered fatalities or
injuries, each State whose citizens were detained as hostages, each State
whose citizens are known to be on board the aircraft and the ICAO

B) Two aforementioned States, each State whose citizens suffered fatalities or
injuries on board the aircraft and the ICAO

C) Two aforementioned States, each State whose citizens suffered fatalities or
injuries, each State whose citizens are known to be on board the aircraft and
the ICAO

Definition of “Security, the ICAO Annex 17”, is a combination of measures:

A) Intended to safeguard international civil aviation against acts of unlawful
interference

B) And human and material resources intended to safeguard international civil
aviation against acts of unlawful interference

C) And human and material resources intended to safeguard international civil
aviation

A State shall provide assistance to an aircraft subjected to an act of unlawful

seizure. This assistance includes:

A) — Only permission to land

B) Provision of navigation aids, air traffic services, permission to land and catering
for passengers

C) _ Provision of navigation aids, air traffic services, permission to land

560

--- Page 287 ---

10.

SECURITY - SAFEGUARDING INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION
AGAINST ACTS OF UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE
For the transport of potentially disruptive passengers some supplementary
safeguards are to be observed such as:
A) Boarding prior to all passengers
B) The boarding will be at the pilot in command discretion
C) The boarding has to be done at the state discretion

Referring to the operational aspects in the unlawful seizure acts, it can be said:

A) The contracting States will not assist with navigation aids, air transit services,
etc, to an aircraft affected by an unlawful seizure act

B) The contracting State will make provisions to ensure that an aircraft affected by
an unlawful seizure act, which has landed in their territory, would be retained in
all cases

C) The contracting State will make provisions to ensure that an aircraft affected by
an unlawful seizure act, which has landed in their territory, would be retained,
unless its departure is justified to protect lives

When mixing or contact does take place between passengers subjected to

security control and other persons not subjected to such control after the

security screening points at airports serving international civil aviation have

been passed

A) _ The persons not subjected to security control shall be identified

B) The passengers concerned and their cabin baggage shall be re-screened
before boarding an aircraft

C) Only the passengers are to be re-screened

When a member state allows police officers, security staff, bodyguards or other
agents of foreign states to carry weapons in their territory for the protection of
aircraft in flight, permission for the carriage of weapons should be conditional
upon:

A) _ prior notification by the state of embarkation to the foreign state in which the
weapons will be carried on the airport of arrival and notification of the pilot in
command of a decision to permit a weapon to be carried on board his aircraft

B) Notification of the pilot in command of a decision to permit a weapon to be
carried on board his aircraft only

C) Agreement between the state of embarkation and the state of destination

A terrorist attack at an airport shall be reported to :
A) Commissioner of Police

B) DGCA

C) Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation)

561

ANSWERS

AIR REGULATIONS


--- Page 288 ---

23

HUMAN PERFORMANCE
AND
LIMITATIONS

Human factors are cited as a major cause in over 73% of accidents, and it is
necessary that a better understanding of human capabilities and limitations - both
physical and psychological — are known to aviators. This figure has not changed
since the 1950’s. Human errors are now considered as being inherent to the cognitive
function of human and are generally inescapable. A sound understanding of Human
Performance and limitations will help enhance performance in the following areas:

Qualities of a Professional Pilot.

Situation awareness, flexibility, task management, effective communications,
threat and error management, high sense of responsibility, aircraft handling skills,
sound knowledge of flying theory, motivation, physical fitness, reliability, balanced
personality, team work, stress management, quick reflexes, risk assessment
capabilities, decision making and crew resource management.

Causes of Aircraft Accidents.

The rate of accidents in commercial aviation (excluding sabotage and acts of
terrorism) is approximatively 1 accident per million airport movements. Most aircraft
accidents are linked to deficiencies in human performance. These deficiencies may
involve a variety of factors. The factors include poor lookout, situation awareness (SA),
decision-making, task organisation, communication, failure to recognise threats to
safety and the commission of errors. Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT) is the most
common form of air accident. Details of different phases of flight are appended below:

563

AIR REGULATIONS

care Flight Time
fant ne 15%

STRATOSPHERE

on Dioxide 0.03% High Altitude —
30 000 ft

Quier Space—>

ow Altitude —

Molecules

564

--- Page 289 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Atmosphere:
Human beings live their lives in the lower reaches of the atmosphere where
temperatures, pressures and oxygen supply are able to support life.

The Troposphere may be considered to stretch from the Earth’s surface to an
altitude of about 36,000ft. The Stratosphere reaches up to over 100,000ft.

The Troposphere contains almost all the weather.

Constituent Gases of the Atmosphere

The earth’s atmosphere near the surface is composed primarily of Nitrogen and
Oxygen. Together, the two comprise about 99% of the gas in the atmosphere. Here’s a
listing of the key components of the lower atmosphere...

Nitrogen - 78.084% Oxygen - 20.95%

Argon - 0.934% Carbon Dioxide - 0.036%
Neon - 0.0018% Helium - 0.0005%
Methane - 0.00017% Hydrogen - 0.00005%
Nitrous Oxide - 0.00003% Ozone - 0.000004%

In addition, water vapor is variable but typically makes up about 1-4% of the
atmosphere.

The relative proportions of these gases remains constant in the Troposphere and
Stratosphere.

The Variation of Pressure and Temperature with Altitude
The International Standard Atmosphere (ISA) is used to show standardized

values for temperature, pressure, density etc.

Pressure decreases with altitude throughout the atmosphere. Temperature
decreases with altitude in the Troposphere. Sea level pressure in ISA is presumed to
be 1013.25 hPa (or 1013.25 mb, or 14.7 Ib per square inch, or 29.92 inches of Mercury
or 760 millimeters)of Mercury. Temperature reduces at 1.98°C per 1000 ft up to 36,090
feet. There after it remains constant at (-) 56.5°.

The partial Pressure of Oxygen.

Partial pressures describe the distribution of certain gases in a mixture and
follows Dalton’s law which states that the total pressure of a mixture of gases is equal
to the sum of the partial pressures of the gases which compose the mixture.

565

AIR REGULATIONS

ALTITUDE vs BLOOD OXYGEN

ALTITUDE BAROMETRIC WATER CARBON OXYGEN ARTERIAL BLOOD

% NORMAL PRESSURE TENSION AT DIOXIDE REMAINDER TENSION OXYGEN SATURATION
PRESSURE BODYTEMP TENSION INAIR TENSION

SEA LEVEL 760 47 40 673 140 100 96%
100%

12,000 FEET 570 47 40 483 100 75 94%

18%

18,000 FEET 380 47 40 300 62 46
50%

24,000 FEET 300 47 40 210 45 33
40%

36,000 FEET 190 47 40 103 21 16
25%

All pressures are in Torr or millimeters of mercury

Effects of Increasing Altitude.

Whatever the air pressure, Oxygen continues to make up 21% of the air by volume.
In other words, the proportion of oxygen in the air always stays the same whatever the
altitude.

The partial pressure of Oxygen decreases with altitude as does the total pressure
of air.

Sea Level Air Density = 1.225 kg / m?
Air Density at 36,000’ = 0.865 kg / m?

Therefore Density at 36,000’ is one third of density at sea level. Hence the quantity
of Oxygen available is proportionately low.

Physiological Zone:

Normal healthy human beings used to living near sea-level willneed supplementary
oxygen to function normally at altitude exceeding 10,000 to 12,000 feet.

Pilots will normally begin breathing supplementary oxygen from 10,000 feet
above sea level.

566

--- Page 290 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

ll
Above 40,000 ft - suas
33,700 - 40,000 ft - 100% Oxygen
40,000 - 33,000 ft -
Oxygen / Air Mixture

Up to 10,000 ft -

Physiological Deficient Zone:

Exists from 12,000 feet to 50,000 feet. Body is not used to this environment. The
adverse effects include-

¢ Middle ear and sinus blockage
e Shortness of breath

¢ Dizziness

e Headache

At 6 to 7000 feet altitude does the human organism start with remarkable
measures to compensate for the drop in pO2 when climbing (threshold for compensatory
reactions).

A pilot, climbing in a non-pressurised aircraft and without using supplemental
oxygen will pass the “critical threshold” at approximately 22 000 feet.

Breathing 100% oxygen will lift the pilot’s physiological safe altitude to
approximately 38 000 ft.

Partial Space Equivalent Zone
This zone extends from 50,000’ to 120nm.
Total Space Equilant Zone extends outwards from 120nm.

¢ 100% Oxygen does not protect from Hypoxia,
¢ Sealed cabins and pressure suits are a must
¢ Blood and body fuels boil over 63,000 feet

* Gravitational changes affect the body

567

AIR REGULATIONS

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

The brain controls all bodily functions. The brain performs an incredible number of
tasks:

° It controls body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate and breathing.

° It accepts information about the world around you from your various senses
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching).

e It handles your physical movement when walking, talking, standing or sitting.
° It lets you think, dream, reason and experience emotions.

e The brain controls decision making and speech, through the brain we experience
consciousness, vision, hearing, taste, smell, thought and memory.

The Nervous System is divided into three main parts:

The Central Nervous System

The central nervous system consists of the brain and the spinal cord. Brain, spinal
cord and peripheral nerves make up a complex, integrated information-processing
and control system known as Central Nervous System. In tandem, they regulate
all the conscious and unconscious facets of your life. The scientific study of the brain
and nervous system is called neuroscience or neurobiology. The brain functions
to receive nerve impulses from the spinal cord and cranial nerves. The spinal cord
contains the nerves that carry messages between the brain and the body.

The Peripheral Nervous System

The peripheral nervous system includes all peripheral nerves. It connects the central
nervous system to the organs and muscles of the body and regulates all purposeful and

568

--- Page 291 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

reflex actions. The peripheral nervous system controls organs and muscles like skin,
eye, blood vessels, heart and stomach.

The Autonomic Nervous System.

The organs (the “viscera”) of our body, such as the heart, stomach and intestines, are
regulated by a part of the nervous system called the Autonomic Nervous System
(ANS). The ANS is part of the peripheral nervous system and it controls many organs
and muscles within the body. In most situations, we are unaware of the workings of the
ANS because it functions in an involuntary, reflexive manner. For example, we do not
notice when blood vessels change size or when our heart beats faster.

The autonomic Nervous System exercises its functions independently of the Central
Nervous System to the extent that it controls parts of body without having to think
about it. The autonomic Nervous System controls eye, heart, breathing, temperature,
blood pressure, stomach, intestines and bladder, urinary output, sweating, glands,
fight or flight response or reaction to stress.

569

AIR REGULATIONS

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

Lungs are complex organs, but what they do is to get rid of carbon dioxide and
exchange it for oxygen.
The respiratory process consists mainly of the diffusion of oxygen through the

respiratory membranes into the blood, transportation to the cells, diffusion into the
cells and elimination of carbon dioxide from the body.

© Nasai cavity
© Pharyax

© Larynx

© Trachea

@ Aiveoli

® Bronchial tree

As you breathe air in through your nose or mouth, it goes past the epiglottis
and into the trachea. It continues down the trachea through your vocal cords in the
larynx until it reaches the bronchi. From the bronchi, air passes into each lung. The
air then follows narrower and narrower bronchioles until it reaches the alveoli.

Within each air sac, the oxygen concentration is high, so oxygen passes or diffuses
across the alveolar membrane into the pulmonary capillary. At the beginning of
the pulmonary capillary, the hemoglobin in the red blood cells has carbon dioxide
bound to it and very little oxygen. The oxygen binds to hemoglobin and the carbon
dioxide is released. Carbon dioxide is also released from sodium bicarbonate dissolved
in the blood of the pulmonary capillary. The concentration of carbon dioxide is high
in the pulmonary capillary, so carbon dioxide leaves the blood and passes across the
alveolar membrane into the air sac. This exchange of gases occurs rapidly (fractions
of a second). The carbon dioxide then leaves the alveolus when you exhale and the
oxygen-enriched blood returns to the heart. Thus, the purpose of breathing is to keep
the oxygen concentration high and the carbon dioxide concentration low in the alveoli
so this gas exchange can occur !

External Respiration

External Respiration takes place through the lungs and refers to the absorption
of Oxygen from the air into the blood. And the excretion of Carbon Dioxide from the

570

--- Page 292 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

blood to the air.

Internal or Tissue Respiration

Internal or Tissue Respiration refers to the transfer of Oxygen from the blood
to the tissues of the body. At the same time as this occurs, the tissues give up Carbon
Dioxide to the blood.

Breathing.
Normal breathing is a purely automatic process under the unconscious control of
the nervous system. The normal rate of respiration in adults 14 to 18 breaths per minute.

The level of carbon Dioxide in the blood effectively regulates the rate and depth of
breathing.

THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM

Blood supplies our organs with life-giving oxygen and carries away waste products.

The circulatory system consists of the heart and the blood vessels and maintains the
flow of blood throughout the body.

The Heart

The arteries carry blood from the heart at high pressure and the veins return
blood to the heart at low pressure. The heart is a pumping system which intakes
deoxygenated blood through the veins, delivering it to the lungs for oxygenation and
then pumping it into the various arteries to be transmitted to where it is needed
throughout the body for energy.

At rest the cardial output (the quantity of blood the heart pumps in one minute)
of an adult is approximately 5 liters/min.

571

AIR REGULATIONS

The Circulatory System.

When the heart muscle contracts or beats (called systole), it pumps blood out of
the heart. The heart contracts in two stages. In the first stage, the right and left atria
contract at the same time, pumping blood to the right and left ventricles. Then the
ventricles contract together to propel blood out of the heart. Then the heart muscle
relaxes (called diastole) before the next heartbeat. This allows blood to fill up the
heart again.

The right and left sides of the heart have separate functions. The right side of the
heart collects oxygen-poor blood from the body and pumps it to the lungs where it picks
up oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. The left side of the heart then collects oxygen-
rich blood from the lungs and pumps it to the body so that the cells throughout your
body have the oxygen they need to function properly.

Blood containing oxygen is pumped around the body from the left ventricle.

The oxygenated blood passes through the aorta into the arteries before arriving
at the smallest vessels of the system, the capillaries.

The Oxygen-Carbon Dioxide exchange takes place through the walls of the
capillaries.

The normal rate of the pulse is the rate of the heartbeat. A healthy person at
rest, has a pulse rate of between 60 and 80 beats per minute. The rate is increased by
exercise, emotional inputs and disease.

When the body experiences stress or fear, adrenaline is released into the
bloodstream causing an immediate increase in the pulse rate.

Composition and Function of the Blood

Blood has two main components — plasma and formed elements. Nearly
everything that blood carries, including nutrients, hormones and waste, is dissolved
in the plasma, which is mostly water. Formed elements, which are cells and parts of
cells, also float in the plasma.

Formed elements include white blood cells (WBCs), which are part of the immune
system, and platelets, which help form clots. White corpuscles produce antibodies
to flight bacteria. Platelets are the smallest of the blood cells and assist in the blood
clotting process.

Red blood cells (RBCs) are responsible for one of blood’s most important tasks --
carrying oxygen and carbon dioxide.

RBCs are numerous; they make up more than 90 percent of the formed elements in
the blood. Virtually everything about them helps them carry oxygen more efficiently.

A red blood cell’s lack of nucleus also gives it more room for hemoglobin (Hb), a
complex molecule that carries oxygen. It’s made of a protein component called a globin
and four pigments called hemes. The hemes use iron to bond to oxygen. Inside each
RBC are about 280 million hemoglobin molecules.

572

--- Page 293 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

If you lose a lot of blood, you lose a lot of your oxygen delivery system. The

immune cells, nutrients and proteins that blood carries are important, too, but doctors -

are generally most concerned with whether your cells are getting enough oxygen.

In an emergency situation, doctors will often give patients volume expanders,
like saline, to make up for lost blood volume. This helps restore normal blood pressure
and lets the remaining red blood cells continue to carry oxygen. Sometimes, this is
enough to keep the body going until it can produce new blood cells and other blood
elements. If not, doctors can give patients blood transfusions to replace some of the
lost blood. Blood transfusions are also fairly common during some surgical procedures.

The principal functions of the blood are:

¢ To carry oxygen to, and carbon dioxide from, the various tissues and organs of the
body.

¢ To carry nutrients to tissues and remove waste products from these tissue.

° To carry chemical messengers, such as hormones including adrenaline, to regulate
the actions and secretions of various organs.

° To transport cells which can attack and destroy invading micro-organisms
enabling the body to resist disease.

° To assist in temperature control of the body.

The circulatory system can malfunction in two principal ways:

* The main component of the system, the heart and the blood vessels, may develop
a fault.

* The blood may become unable to carry enough Oxygen for the need of the organs
and tissues of the body.

Failures or Malfunctions of the Circulatory System - Angina and Heart
Attack.

Lack of oxygen supply to the heart may give rise to symptoms of Angina. A heart
attack is when low blood flow causes the heart to starve for oxygen. Heart muscle dies
or becomes permanently damaged. Your doctor calls this a myocardial infarction.

Some cause of angina and heart attack

Most heart attacks are caused by a blood clot that blocks one of the coronary
arteries. The coronary arteries bring blood and oxygen to the heart. If the blood flow is
blocked, the heart starves for oxygen and heart cells die.

A clot most often forms in a coronary artery that has become narrow because
of the build-up of a substance called plaque along the artery walls. Some times, the
plaque cracks and triggers a blood clot to form.

Occasionally, sudden overwhelming stress can trigger a heart attack.

573

AIR REGULATIONS

¢ Bad genes (hereditary factors) ¢ Unhealthy cholesterol levels,
¢ Being male especially high LDL (“bad”) cholesterol
¢ Diabetes and low HDL (“good”) cholesterol

¢ Getting older ¢ Lack of exercise
¢ High blood pressure ¢ Stress
¢ Smoking ° Obesity

¢ Alcohol

¢ Too much fat in your diet

Failures or Malfunctions of the Circulatory System - Insufficiency of Oxygen.

HYPOXIA

The term cerebral hypoxia technically refers to lack of oxygen supply to the
cerebral hemispheres (the outer portion of the brain). However, it is more typically
used to refer to a lack of oxygen supply to the entire brain.

The body organs and tissues may be deprived of the oxygen they need because of
illness or disease.

But the pilot must know that oxygen deprivation or hypoxia can be caused by
breathing air at the low pressures at high altitude.

Hypoxia will cause a pilot’s intellectual and sensory judgment to become
impaired. In mild cases, hypoxia causes only inattentiveness, poor judgment, and
uncoordinated movement. Severe cases result in a state of complete unawareness
and unresponsiveness (coma) — brain stem reflexes, including response to light and
the breathing reflex, stop. Only blood pressure and heart function are maintained.
If this persists, brain death is inevitable. If the lack of oxygen to the brain is limited
to a very brief period of time, coma may be reversible with varying levels of return
to function, depending on the extent of injury. Sometimes seizures may occur, which
may be continuous with no stop between them (status epilepticus). Serious oxygen
deprivation can kill a pilot within minutes

Hypoxia is classified into four different types

(a) Hypoxic hypoxia

Hypoxic hypoxia is the result of low oxygen levels in the bloodstream. In pilots,
this most often occurs with exposure to altitude (hypobaric hypoxia). At low altitudes,
the partial pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere is adequate to maintain brain
function at peak efficiency. Atmospheric pressure and the partial pressure of oxygen
both decline at higher altitudes.

(b) Anaemic hypoxia
Oxygen in blood is carried by haemoglobin, which is found in red blood cells.

When the red blood cell count decreases, or the haemoglobin does not function properly,
less oxygen can be carried by the blood. This can occur in conditions such as heavy

574

--- Page 294 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

bleeding, some cancers, sickle cell anaemia, or carbon monoxide poisoning, to name a
few. A person suffering from anaemia may notice symptoms such as breathlessness,
fatigue, or chest pain, and symptoms will worsen at higher altitudes, as the effects of
hypoxia and anaemia are additive.

(c) Ischaemic hypoxia/stagnant hypoxia

The term ischaemia refers to inadequate supply of blood, and ischaemic
hypoxia occurs when there is inadequate blood flow to body tissues. This can occur
with constriction of blood vessels (for example, this is often seen in fingers and toes
exposed to cold) as well as in situations of low blood pressure and cardiac output such
as fainting, or during exposure to high sustained accelerations (stagnant hypoxia).
Oxygen therapy is not very helpful in this form of hypoxia. The best remedy is to
correct the underlying cause.

(d) Histotoxic Hypoxia

Histotoxic hypoxia refers to an inability of the cells of the body to use the oxygen
available. This type of hypoxia is rare in pilots, but it can occur with certain conditions
such as cyanide poisoning, chemical poisoning, and intoxication with certain drugs.
Histotoxic hypoxia can also be caused by high blood alcohol levels.

Times of Useful Consciousness:

Rapid Decompression

Altitude (ft) | Progressive
Decompression
==
ow [oan [ome [oom
a a
a a a
250 |

575

AIR REGULATIONS

Drug overdose/ alcohol The symptoms are slow but * Provide Oxygen.
Asphyxiation caused by progressive, insidious in * Descend below
smoke inhalation onset, and are most marked 10,000 feet or

at altitudes starting above Minimum Safe
10,000 ft (8500 m). Night vision,} Altitude if it
however, can be impaired is higher than
starting at altitudes 5000’. 10,000’.
Its onset may be accompanied
by a feeling of well being,
High altitudes pnown aseuphoria,
: ‘ven minor hypoxia impairs

Choking night vision and slows reaction
* Compression of the time.

trachea More serious hypoxia interferes

Diseases that paralyze with reasoning, gives rise

the respiratory muscles to unusual fatigue and,

A tobacco smoker is finally, results in a loss of

likely to experience the consciousness/ death.

effects of hypoxia at a Impaired Judgment
lower then a non-smoke Headache

Very low blood pressure
Strangulation

Cardiac arrest (when the
heart stops pumping)
Carbon monoxide
poisoning

Tingling in hands & feet
Hyperventilation

Muscular Impairment
Memory Impairment

Sensory Loss

Tunnel Vision

Cyanosis (a bluing of the body
extremities)

Fornication (A feeling of ants
under the skin)

Carbon Monoxide Poisoning

Carbon monoxide is a colourless, odourless, tasteless gas that is a product of
incomplete combustion. Haemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying chemical in the blood,
picks up carbon monoxide over 200 times more readily than it picks up oxygen. Thus,
even minute quantities in the cockpit (often from improperly vented exhaust fumes)
may result in pilot incapacitation. Exhaust gases from piston engines can consist of
as much as 9% carbon monoxide. So gases from leaking exhausts can cause carbon
monoxide poisoning in pilots.

576

--- Page 295 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Carbon Monoxide poisoning Actions to be taken if carbon
Symptoms: Monoxide poisoning is suspected:

Initially, there is an inability to Turn off cabin heating

concentrate Open cabin ventilators

Headache Consider using oxygen if available
Dizziness Land as soon as possible

N: ausea Take medical aid.

Impaired vision Do not fly till cleared by doctor
Lethargy or weakness

Impaired judgment AT ALL TIMES WHEN THE CABIN
Personality change HEATING IS USED , FRESH AIR
Impaired memory MUST BE CIRCULATED TO REDUCE
Flushed cheeks and cherry-red lips | PRESENCE OF CO.

Convulsions

Hyperventilation
“Hyperventilation” is another word for “over breathing” and may be defined as
lung ventilation in excess of the body’s needs. Good training is the best way to avoid
Hyperventilation in pilots.
. The chances of Hyperventilation effecting your passengers can be reduced by
giving them a thorough pre-flight briefing on every aspect of the flying sortie.

At low altitude, the |Symptoms of Hyperven | Treatment of Hyperventilation

most common causes|tilation are:

* Breathe oxygen at 100 percent. If hypoxia is

of hyperventi- wo.
lation are: * Dizziness. the cause, the symptoms will improve marked-
- Intense * Tingling. ly after three or four breaths.
concentrationona |° Visual disturbances. * Ifthe symptoms persist, consciously slow the
difficult task * Hot or cold sensation. rate of breathing to 10-12 breaths per minute
. Fear + Anxiety. and do not breathe deeply.
- Anxiety. * Loss of muscular co- * Ifyou are flying below 10,000 feet, hypoxia is
* Motion sickness. ordination. unlikely and hyperventilation may be assumed.
© Shock. * Increased heart rate. * Ifyou suspect that any occupant of your
+ Vibration. * Spasms. aircraft is suffering from hyperventilation,
eat + Loss of consciousness. try calm them down. Give them a simple task
. : to fulfill that might take their mind off their
* High G-forces. * cramping and spasms anxiety.
of the hands and feet. oy ae
Cold clammy skin ’ One of the direct causes of hyperventilation
is a reduction in the carbon dioxide level in

* Paleness the blood, the condition may be alleviated by
getting the sufferer to breathe into a paper
bag. This action will increase the blood’s
carbon dioxide level causing the brain to

reduce the breathing rate.

577

ATR REGULATIONS

Smoking

A pilot who is also a smoker may experience the symptoms of oxygen deprivation,
or hypoxia, at a lower altitude (7,000’) then a non-smoker (10,000’).

A person who smokes one packet of cigarettes per day will reduce his capacity to
carry oxygen by 5-8%.

A smoker also has increased susceptibility to Carbon Monoxide poisoning .

+ Lung cancer.

* Breathing problems.

* Circulatory problems.

* Reduced tolerance to G forces.
* Increased risk of heart attack.
* Degradation of night vision.

Alcohol

Alcohol acts primarily as a depressant. Do not fly while under the influence
of alcohol. An excellent rule is to allow twenty-four hours between the last drink
and takeoff time.-Even small amounts of alcohol in the system can adversely affect
judgement and decision-making abilities.

Relatively small amounts of alcohol significantly decrease a pilot’s tolerance to
hypoxia (oxygen lack). At 6,000 feet (1800 m) the effect of one drink is that of two
drinks at sea level. Even at sea level alcohol impairs judgement and reaction time.

Therefore, alcohol and flying do not mix.

Remember that your body metabolises alcohol at a fixed rate, and no amount of
coffee or medication will alter this rate. Alcohol is eliminated from the blood at a rate

of approximately one unit per hour.

Also, do not fly with a hangover, or a ‘masked hangover’ (symptoms suppressed
by aspirin, caffeine or other medication). High altitude, where oxygen is deficient

aggravates these effects.

One unit of alcohol = half a pint of beer = a standard glass of wine = one measure
of spirits.
Recomniended maximum alcohol intake:
MEN — 5 units daily, 21 units per week.
WOMEN - 3 units daily, 14 units per week.

Blood alcohol concentrations of 40 mgs per 100 ml results in significant increases
in errors committed by pilots.

. Impaired judgment and Impaired ability to reason.
* Degraded muscular coordination and Degraded vision.

578

--- Page 296 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

. Lack of inhibitions and self-control.

° Increased susceptibility to Hypoxia.

. Damages to the liver, heart, brain and blood cells.
. Affects short and long-term memory.

° Slows reaction time.

. Sufferer may feel that performance is improved.

. Balance and sensory illusions.

° Irregular sleep patterns .

Blood Pressure

; Blood-pressure depends on the cardiac output, the resistance of the capillaries
(peripheral resistance), the elasticity of the arterial walls and the blood volume and
viscosity.

° Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by blood on the walls of the main arteries.

. The blood-pressure which is measured during flight medical checks is the pressure
in the artery of the upper arm (representing the pressure at heart level).

. The permanent pressure against the arterial wall is called diastolic pressure.
The increased pressure occurring with each beat of the heart is called the systolic
pressure.

° 120/80 is a normal blood pressure for a healthy young adult.

° High blood pressure or hypertension which is a major cause of unfitness in pilots.
Causes of Blood Pressure (Hypertension)

. Stress

. Smoking

* Poor diet (excess fat or salt)

° Obesity

. Lack of exercise

. Age
* Narrowing of the arteries
Donating Blood

In a completely healthy individual, the fluid reduction caused by donating one
unit of blood is replaced within several hours. In some people, however, the loss of blood
causes disturbances to the circulation that may last for several days. While the effects
at ground level are minimal, flying during this period may entail a risk. Generally,
active pilots should not donate blood, but if blood has been donated they should wait at
least 48 hr before flying.

579

AIR REGULATIONS

Cabin Pressurization
“Decompression” means the lowering of pressure.

The maximum altitude without oxygen at which flying efficiency is not impaired
is 8000 feet. When flying at altitude below 10,000 feet, the risk of suffering from
conditions related to decompression is low. At ground level the body tissues are saturated
with nitrogen, the inert gas which makes up 80% of our atmosphere. As the aircraft
climbs atmospheric pressure is reduced, and by 18 000 feet ASL (5 486 m) atmospheric
pressure is halved. Decompression sickness symptoms may develop at 18000 feet and
above. Pilots flying aircraft with unpressurized cabins at altitudes greater than 25 000
feet ASL (7 620 m) may be subject to the “bends”. This condition is caused by bubbles
of nitrogen forming in the tissues because the ambient (atmospheric) pressure is less
than the pressure at ground level. (An example of this phenomenon is the bubbles
formed when a bottle of soda pop is opened, and the pressure is reduced.) The bubbles
may track into joint spaces causing a dull, sickening pain. More dangerously they may
be released into the lungs or the brain, giving rise to chest pain and/or collapse. The
tendency to develop the bends increases with high rates of climb, age, obesity, physical
activity and low temperatures.

Airlines and high performance aircraft have cabin pressurization system to
maintain an artificially “low altitude” within the cabin or cockpit. The pressurization
of a commercial airliner flying at 30,000ft maintains an internal cabin pressure
equivalent to about 6,000 ft, with a maximum pressure of 8,000 ft.

A fast decompression is recognizable by, mist in the cabin, blast towards the
exterior of the aircraft, expansion of body gases and blast of air released violently from
the lungs.

A slow decompression may be caused by a slight airtightness defect or a bad
functioning of the pressurization.

Decompression Sickness

Without a cabin pressurization system, pilot and passengers in high flying aircraft
would be exposed to high altitude, like hypoxia, low temperatures and Decompression
Sickness/illness.

Henry’s Law explains the occurrence of decompression sickness. The principle
that at a constant temperature the concentration of a gas dissolved in a fluid with
which it does not combine chemically is almost directly proportional to the partial
pressure of the gas at the surface of the fluid. A rapid reduction in ambient pressure,
may cause the nitrogen in our blood to come out of solution as small bubbles leading to
decompression sickness. Symptoms of decompression sickness are bends, chokes, skin
manifestations, neurological symptoms and circulatory shock. Symptoms may appear
several hours after the exposure. Do not fly for at least 12 hrs after experiencing rapid
decompression even though you may be feeling fit.

580

--- Page 297 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Effect of Nitrogen Bubbles
Joints : Bubbles in the joints cause rheumatic-like pain, called the Bends.

Skin : Nitrogen bubbles released under the skin cause the Creeps, a sensation of
movement under the skin.

Respiratory System : Shortness of breath and a feeling of burning, gnawing and
piercing pain. Known as the Chokes.

The Brain : Loss of mental functions and control of movement. Known as the Staggers.

Treatment of Decompression Sickness
* Keep patient warm and on 100% Oxygen.
+ An immediate descent must be initiated.
* Land as soon as possible.
* Seek medical assistance immediately on landing.
Flying Following Diving
Decompression sickness can occur when flying at low altitude in individuals who
have been diving, using compressed air breathing apparatus shortly before flight at a

depth of 30 feet or more. As a general rule, individuals should not fly within 24 hours
following diving and certainly not the same day.

Occasionally a ‘medical emergency’ arises as a result of compressed air diving,
when a diver is in danger of developing air-embolism (bends) at the surface altitude,
as a result of being unable to decompress before surfacing. In some of these cases
air-evacuation is the only feasible method of getting the patient to a decompression
chamber in time to treat this condition. Flight, however, should be at the lowest possible
altitude to avoid aggravating the condition. Symptoms and signs usually appear within
15 minutes to 12 hours after surfacing; but in severe cases, symptoms may appear
before surfacing or immediately afterwards. Delayed occurrence of symptoms is rare,
but it does occur, especially if air travel follows diving.

Incapacitation in Flight.

The risk of seizure in flight is obvious. Incapacitation is in most cases is sudden,
unpredictable, unavoidable, prolonged, complete, and potentially more frequent in the
stressful flying environment, and constitutes a direct threat to the health and safety.
Periodical medical examinations minimize the risk of incapacitation in flight. The
frequency of medical checks increases with advancing age.

Obvious Incapacitation : Obvious incapacitation normally refers to a state in
which all of a crew member’s physical or mental functions are lost, including loss of
consciousness or being unable to move while retaining consciousness, rendering them
completely unable to carry out their duties. Obvious incapacitation can sometimes
involve convulsions, or the victim may lapse into unconsciousness several minutes
after the incapacitation occurs. Causes of obvious incapacitation include cardiac arrest,
myocardial infection, intracerebral hemorrhage, cerebral apoplexy, and epilepsy.

581

AIR REGULATIONS

Subtle / Insiduous incapacitation : Subtle (develops slowly and gradually),
incapacitation refers to a state of a partial or temporary loss of physical or mental
function which manifests itself in the form of a partial paralysis, a dulling of perception,
judgment, or responses or lack thereof (a state of absence of mind, distraction of
attention), trouble with speech, inadequate responses, meaningless utterances,
etc. Particular attention must be paid to the fact that a crew member may become
incapacitated even though their appearance is no different from normal. Possible
causes of subtle incapacitation include a temporary hypoglycemia, reduction in blood
pressure, cerebropathy or psychopathy, excessive muscular fatigue, excessive drinking,
insufficient sleep, emotional instability, toothache, stomach ache, and headache. Since
other crew members are often unable to detect subtle incapacitation quickly, from
a flight safety point of view, it is possible that subtle incapacitation may lead to a
situation of comparatively greater danger than obvious incapacitation.

FITS AND FAINTS

Epilepsy

A fit or seizure is usually referred to as “epilepsy”. A fit or a seizure is not a
specific disease but a set of signs or symptoms in response to a disturbance of the
electrical activity in the brain.

A seizure may or may not be associated with a loss of consciousness. Grand Mal
Epilepsy manifests as a generalized seizure and is associated with a transient loss of
consciousness. Grand Mal Epilepsy may be associated with a prodromal phase. Grand
Mals are normally accompanied by convulsions and uncontrolled physical movement.

Petit Mal Epilepsy is a generalized seizure, but is not associated with a loss of
consciousness. Petit Mals are a minor attack. Any fit, major or minor, is associated
with an unpredictable loss of consciousness and is therefore an absolute bar to the
holding of a flying licence.

Faint

A faint is a common cause of a loss of consciousness in adults. The most common
causes of faints are :

° Standing up quickly after prolonged sitting especially when hot or dehydrated.
. A sudden shock.

° Loss of blood after an accident.

° Lack of food or fluid,

* Other physiological stress.

Syncope is a temporary but sudden loss of consciousness when blood flow to
the brain is compromised. In young individuals, fear, anxiety, sight of blood, etc., can
result in a temporary loss of consciousness. This is referred to as vasovagal syncope.
Frequently, syncope is associated with symptoms like light headedness, muscle
weakness, and dizziness before the actual fainting occurs. A faint has no significance
as far as future flying is concerned, so long as the cause is clearly understood.

582

--- Page 298 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

PHYSIOLOGY

“Physiology” is a technical term meaning the science of the organic functions of
humans, animals and plants.

THE EYE

The eye delivers to the brain information about the outside world at a much
faster rate then any other sensory organ. The eye is the organ of sight. The eye is the
most sensitive of our sensory organs. Its basic structure is similar to a camera with an
aperture (Iris), a lens (lens) and a light sensitive screen (Retina).

Pupil Eyeli
: yelid Superior oblique

Iris
muscle tendon

Sclera Superior rectus muscle

Inferior oblique muscle:

Inferior rectus muscle € e Cornea

Corjunctiva

The Cornea

Light enters the eye through the Cornea, a clear window at the front of the

eyeball. The Cornea is capable of contributing 70% and 80% i
ability of the eye. g 6 6 towards total focusing

The Iris and the Pupil

The amount of light allowed to enter the eye i i i
ye is controlled by the Iris. Pupil
hole in the centre of the Iris adjusts to the flow of light. " ns MPH, the

The Lens

' The shape of the lens is changed by muscles. This controls final focusing onto the
‘ovea.

The Retina

The Retina is a light sensitive screen lining the inside of the eyeball. On this
screen are light-sensitive cells. When light falls on them, it generates a small electrical

583

AIR REGULATIONS

charge which is passed to the brain by nerve fibers (neurons) which combine to form
the Optic Nerve.

The retina has rods on its peripheral zone and cones on its central zone. The
retina contains the receptors for vision: about 100 million rods and 6 million cones.

The Rods
The Rods can only detect black and white but are much more sensitive at lower
light levels. Rods are responsible for our peripheral vision.

The Fovea

The central part of the retina is called the Fovea. The fovea centralis is a small,
central pit composed of closely packed cones in the eye. This is the area of best day
vision and no night vision at all. Any object that needs to be examined in detail is
automatically brought to focus on the fovea. This is called “Central Vision”. The rest of
the retina fulfils the function of attracting our attention to movement and change.

Eye Movement

To track an object successfully, or to focus on an object, the eyes need to move in
harmony with one another. This means that the brain must co-ordinate control of the
muscles of the two eyes. In a fatigued person, double vision can occur.

Binocular Vision

Binocular Vision means seeing with two eyes. With binocular vision each eye sees
an object from two slightly different angles. The brain merges the two images into one
and is thus able to perceive that the image has depth. A further advantage of binocular
vision is that the blind spot of one eye is covered by the other eye. Depth perception
when objects are close is achieved through binocular vision.

Visual Acuity
Visual acuity is a measure of the capacity of the eye to determine small detail,
undistorted, at a given distance.

The sharpest visual acuity occurs when the retinal image is sharply focused on
the fovea so that the pilot needs to look exactly in the direction of the on-coming aircraft
to detect it. It is, thus essential for pilots to have normal visual acuity, either with the
naked eye, or by wearing spectacles, in order that they may detect objects clearly at
safe distance.

Accommodation

As well as being able to see objects clearly at a distance, pilots also need good near
vision in order to read instruments and maps. Being able to focus on close objects is a
function of the eye’s ability to accommodate.

Reading Glasses

Pilots and drivers who have reached middle-age normally wear bi-focal spectacles
to allow them to see clearly at a distance and to read their instruments and maps,
while wearing the same spectacles.

584

--- Page 299 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Limitations of Acuity — The Sharpness of Central Vision

The sharpness of central vision drops as light falls on retina at increasing angles
from the fovea.

* Angular distance from the fovea * Amount of light available
* Physical imperfections within the * Size and contours of an object.
visual system
- Age * Distance of the object from the viewer
* Hypoxia * Contrast of an object with its
surrounding
* Smoking * Relative motion of a moving object.
* Alcohol * Drugs or medication

* Visibility (dust, mist etc.)

LIMITATIONS OF THE VISUAL SYSTEM
Night Vision — Adaptation

Adaptation is the adjustment of the eyes to high or low levels of illumination. The
time required for complete adaptation for high levels of illumination is 10 sec and for
full dark adaptation 30 min. When passing from bright ambient surroundings into the
dark, visual capacity is severely reduced until the eyes have adapted to the dark. It is
especially important for pilots to allow sufficient time for dark adaptation to take place
before flying at night. Dark adaptation takes time — about 7 minutes for the cones and
30 minutes for the rods.

Vision Under Dim and Bright Illumination

Under conditions of dim illumination, small print and colors on aeronautical
charts and aircraft instruments become unreadable unless adequate cockpit lighting
is available. Moreover, another aircraft must be much closer to be seen unless its
navigation lights are on. In darkness, vision becomes more sensitive to light, a process
called dark adaptation. Although exposure to total darkness for at least 30 minutes is
required for complete dark adaptation, a pilot can achieve a moderate degree of dark
adaptation within 20 minutes under dim red cockpit lighting. Since red light severely
distorts colors, especially on aeronautical charts, and can cause serious difficulty
in focusing the eyes on objects inside the aircraft, its use is advisable only where
optimum outside night vision capability is necessary. Even so, white cockpit lighting
must be available when needed for map and instrument reading, especially under IFR
conditions. Dark adaptation is impaired by exposure to cabin pressure altitudes above
5,000 feet, carbon monoxide inhaled in smoking and from exhaust fumes, deficiency of
Vitamin A in the diet, and by prolonged exposure to bright sunlight. Since any degree
of dark adaptation is lost within a few seconds of viewing a bright light, a pilot should
close one eye when using a light to preserve some degree of night vision. Look to the
side (15 - 20 deg) of the object.

585

AIR REGULATIONS

The Blind Spot

The blind spot is point on the retina where the optic nerve enters the eyeball.
Here the retina has no covering of light-detecting cells. If the eye remains looking
straight ahead it is possible for a closing aircraft to remain in the blind spot until a
very short time before impact. To lessen the danger of collision, pilots are taught to
carry out a systematic look out at all times. With both eyes open, the blind spot of one
eye is covered by the other eye. But be aware of obstructions to your visual field such
as passengers or canopy structures.

Empty Visual Field (Empty Field Myopia)

In the absence of anything to focus on (that is when your visual field is empty) the
natural focus point of the eye is, on average, at a distance of between 1 and 2 meters in
front of the eye. Pilots should minimize the risks associated with empty visual field by
periodically and deliberately focusing on objects, both close and at a distance.
Damage to the Visual System

Very high light occurs at altitude. At altitude, light contains more of the high
energy blue and ultra violet wavelengths then is experienced at sea level. Over a
long period such light can cause cumulative damage to the retina and lens of the eye.
However most harmful wavelengths are filtered out by the cockpit windows.
Vibrations.

Vibrations can cause blurred vision. This is due to tuned resonance oscillations of
the eyeballs.

Protection of the Visual System — Sunglasses

When flying through a thunderstorm with lightning you can protect yourself
from flash blindness by turning up the intensity of cockpit lights,by looking inside the
cockpit,by wearing sunglasses and by using face blinds or face curtains when installed.

The requirement of good sunglasses is to absorb atleast 85% of visible light to
eliminate glare without decreasing visual acuity, absorb UV and IR radiation and
absorb all colors equally. Make sure you avoid using cheap sunglasses. Light sensitive
lenses (Photo chromatic) are also generally forbidden for use in flight. Sunglasses

should have the following characteristics:

° Be impact resistant.

° Have thin frames (minimum visual obstruction).
° Be coated with polycarbonate for strength.

° Be of good optical quality.

° Have a luminance transmittance of 10-15%.

° Possess appropriate filtration characteristics.

586

--- Page 300 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

VISUAL DEFECTS

The most common visual defects are caused by the distorted shape of the eyeball.
Myopia

Myopia is more commonly known as short-sightedness. In a myopia eye, the
eyeball is longer then normal causing the image to fall in front of the retina. A concave
lens will correct Myopia by bending the light from distant objects outwards before it

hits the cornea. Normal distance vision for pilots may be very approximately assessed
as the ability to read a car number plate at 40 meters.

Hypermetropia

Hypermetropia is also known as long-sightedness, because only objects at a
distance can be seen clearly.

A convex lens will overcome Hypermetropia by bending the light rays from near
objects inwards before they meet the cornea.

Presbyopia
Presbyopia is the inability of the lens to change its shape to accommodate
adequately, to focus as image from a near object onto the retina. This condition normally

arises in people between the ages of 40 and 50. it is a form of long-sightedness and is
corrected using a convex lens.

Astigmatism

Astigmatism is caused by a misshapen or oblong cornea. For a person with
astigmatism objects will appear irregularly shaped.

The Wearing of Corrective Spectacles by pilots

Pilots who wear corrective spectacles or contact lenses, for whatever reason, must
carry a spare pair at all times when they are exercising the privileges of their license.

Glaucoma.

Glaucoma is characterised by progressive narrowing of the visual field, insidious
onset and concealed progression and an increase in intra-ocular pressure. Glaucoma
can lead to total blindness and undetected reduction of the visual field. It reduces
visual acuity in its final stage.

Colour Vision

Good colour vision is essential for pilots because of the use of colour associated
with the items listed above.

¢ Navigation light of aircraft.

e Runways and airfields.

e Ground obstructions.

° Cockpit displays and instruments.
* Maps and charts.

° Emergency flares.

¢ Light signals.

587

AIR REGULATIONS

Colour Blindness
Colour-blindness or, more accurately, colour-defective vision, is caused by a defect
in the structure of the colour-sensitive cones in the retina.

Vision and Speed - Reaction Times
Reaction time depends on the closing relative speed of two aircraft. If one of the
aircraft were to be a fast jet, the closing speed would be much higher.

THE EAR
The ear performs two quite separate functions:
° To receive vibrations or sound waves in the air which it transmits to the brain.

° To act as a balance organ and acceleration director.

Semicircular canals

Vestibular
. cochlear
nerve

Pinna
Cochlea
Extemal
auditory
canal
“ Eustachian

tube

THE MIDDLE AND INNER EAR
The Tympanum and the Ossicles transmit sound waves to the inner ear.
The Eustachian Tube

The Eustachian tube allows pressure in the middle ear to equalize across the ear
drum with outside or ambient pressure when climbing or descending. No one should
fly if their Eustachian tube is blocked and they cannot “clear” their ears.
The Eustachian Tube. Effects of Altitude Change - Clearing the Ears.

It is during descent when difficulty in clearing the ears is most likely to be
experienced.

588

--- Page 301 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Otis Barotraumas - Stretching of the ear drum caused by the expansion and
contraction of gases trapped in the inner ear by a blocked Eustachian tube.

; If you experience problems with pressure equalization during descent, swallow
deliberately with the nostrils pinched closed, yawn, or blow down the nose again with
the nostrils pinched closed. If the problem is not resolved, the rate of descend should
be decreased or stopped at intervals to allow more time for pressure to equalise. This
is also known as step descend. Pilot may resort to even climb if pressure persists
Remember, never fly if your Eustachian tube becomes swollen or blocked and ou
cannot clear your ears. *

Audible Range of the Human Ear
Sound has three main qualities:

Pitch — which depends on the frequency of the vibration.
Loudness or Intensity — which depends on the amplitude of the vibrations.
Quality — which can be either harmonious or just plain noisy.

The range of pitch or frequency of sounds that a fit young person can hear lies
between 20 and 20,000 Hertz, or cycles per second. Detectable sound range also
depends on loudness.

Noise and Hearing Loss
Hearing impairment can arise because of:

1. Exposure to loud noise.
2. Physical damage to the hearing mechanism.
38. Advanced age.
4. A build up of wax.
Conductive Deafness — is caused by damage to the ossicles or the ear drum.

Noise Induced Hearing Loss —Any prolonged exposure to noise in excess of 90 db can
end up in noise induced hearing loss. This can damage the very sensitive membrane
in the cochlea.

Presbycusis — is the name given to the deteriorati i i
: ion of hearing with ad
High tones are cut off first. ° —_—

PROTECTION OF HEARING

; Noise induced hearing loss can be avoided or reduced to a minimum by wearing
suitable ear protectors.

; Always protect your ears if you know you are going to be exposed to excessive
noise. In the cockpit, use the best quality headset you can afford in order to reduce
background noise.

589

AIR REGULATIONS

The Ear and Balance

“Orientation” refers to a human being’s ability to maintain equilibrium and
to interpret the body’s position in space. The ear also provides us with our sense of
balance. The primary and most reliable sense of spatial orientation is eyesight. The
balance sensors situated in the ear provide us with a secondary system.

The Balance Mechanism
The Vestibular apparatus (Otoliths + Semi-circular canals) helps maintain spatial
orientation. The Otoliths detect linear acceleration. The Semi-Circular Canals detect

angular acceleration.

Orientation
Human beings maintain spatial orientation using a combination of three factors:

e The sense of vision.

e¢ The Vestibular Apparatus.
¢ The Somatosensory system (“seat of the pants” feeling) / G-Force.

The most reliable sense is the sense of vision.

Our vestibular apparatus can detect accelerations but cannot determine what
position we are in if no acceleration is present.

The somatosensory system is not reliable at all. Neither is the ear’s balancing
mechanism sufficiently reliable for a pilot to maintain spatial orientation using this
sense alone.

Both the Otoliths Organs and the Semi-Circular Canals send signals to our brain
by means of impulses arising from the body being subjected to accelerations.

Fluid flow occurs when the body is subject to angular acceleration.

The flow takes place in the apposite direction to the acceleration, moving sensory
hairs which send signals to the brain that the body is in motion.

There is no fluid flow when the body is at rest or if linear or turning movement
is taking place at a steady speed. In these situations, the vestibular apparatus alone
cannot detect motion.

Only the eyes and instruments tell a pilot that he is in a steady turn.

Conflicts Between Ears and Eyes, Illusions and Disorientation / Vertigo.

Various complex motions and forces and certain visual scenes encountered in
flight can create illusions of motion and position. Spatial disorientation from these
illusions can be prevented only by visual reference to reliable, fixed points on the
ground or to flight instruments.

Nlusions - General
In aviation any mismatch between what we sense and what we expect is an
illusion.

590

--- Page 302 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Because of the lack of stable visual references and the erroneous mental models
that may be produced, the pilot is at a disadvantage.

Illusions may occur during all stages of the flight, and to pilots of every experience
and skill level.

; The pilot, therefore, should be aware of the possibility of misinterpreting the
information received.

Visual illusions are particularly dangerous in aviation, as we normally consider
our visual input to be the most reliable of our senses.

Atmospheric Perspective

The pilot who has flown mostly in relatively polluted air may use ‘atmospheric
perspective’ as a cue to range. If he then flies in a very clear atmosphere he may believe
distant objects, because of their clarity, to be much closer then they actually are.

Laws of Perceptual Organization

The ‘Laws of perceptual organization of Gestalt Theory’ deal with factors such as
proximity, continuity, similarity, symmetry, simplicity and closure.

Gestalt laws formulate basic principles governing how objects are organized and
perceived.

We must use extreme caution to ensure that we not construct our mental model
according to our wishes or desires.

Illusions When Taxing ~ Relative Movement

; When taxing into a headwind the blowing snow will give the illusion that the
aircraft is taxing faster then it actually is.

Illusions on Take-off —- Somatogravic Illusion
An acceleration gives the pilot an impression of the nose of the aircraft pitching
up.
Outside References
Outside references may give false impression within the cockpit.

* Immediately after take-off.

¢ Over water.

¢ In hilly terrain.

¢ Gently sloping terrain.

¢ A bank of sloping cloud.

¢ The ground sloping down on the approach.

Illusions in the Cruise

Autogenesis. Staring at an isolated and stationary light when other visual
references are inadequate or absent, may cause auto-kinetic movements of the eyes.

591

AIR REGULATIONS

In the dark, a static light will appear to move about when stared at for many seconds.
The disoriented pilot will lose control of the aircraft in attempting to align it with the

light.

Vertical Separation
Acommon problem in flight is the evaluation of the relative altitude of approaching
aircraft and the assessment of a potential collision risk.

Approach and Landing
In the final stages of a flight the pilot has to cope with the most critical visual
tasks, and these may be divided into 3 stages:

a) Initial judgment of glideslope
b) Maintenance of the glideslope
c) Ground proximity judgments.

Initial judgment of Appropriate Glideslope

Visual Angle — To judge the approach path, the pilot is attempting to establish an
angle. This angle is the ‘Visual Angle’, and is measured at the pilot’s eye down from the
horizon to the visual aiming point on the runway.

Width of Runways — The width of the runway may also cause incorrect height
judgments on the final approach. A pilot used to a standard width runway may, when
approaching an unfamiliar narrow runway, judge he is too high and therefore round
out too low on approach.

The Black Hole Effect — The absence of visual cues leads to an illusion that the
aircraft is too high, as a result the approach path may be flown at too shallow an angle,
the aircraft may touch down short of the runway.

Visual Illusions On Approach

Ground lighting illusions. Lights along a straight path, such as a road, and even
lights on moving trains can be mistaken for runway and approach lights. Bright
runway and approach lighting systems, especially where few lights illuminate the
surrounding terrain, may create the illusion of less distance to the runway. The pilot
who does not recognize this illusion will fly a higher approach. Conversely, the pilot
overflying terrain which has few lights to provide height cues may make a lower than
normal approach.

(a) Shallow Approaches:- Upslope runway or terrain, narrower than usual
runway, feature less terrain, rain on the wind screen and haze give an illusion
of being high resulting in shallower approaches.

(b) Steep Approaches:- Down sloping runway or terrain, wider than usual
runway and bright runway / app. lights give illusion of being low, resulting in
high approaches.

592

--- Page 303 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Maintenance of the Glideslope

; Aiming Pilot and Aircraft Attitude Pitch Angle — Ones established on the
glide path, it is relatively easy to visually maintain the glide path by keeping the
aiming point at a fixed position on the windscreen.

Inadvertent Speed Loss — On the approach, with an inadvertent speed loss
and a gradual loss of altitude, the runway could remain in the same position on the
windscreen, giving the impression of a safe approach, until touch down occurs some
distance before the threshold.

Texture and Texture Flow

As long as visual texture flows away from the aiming point and the visual angle
between this point and the horizon remains constant, the approach will progress
normally.

Ground Proximity Judgments

The pilot will use a number of cues in his height assessment on the final stage of
the approach, among which will be:

° That the apparent speed of objects on the ground will increase as the height
reduces.

° ne the size of objects, such as runway lights etc, will increase with decreasing
istance.

° That the apparent width of the runway will increase.
¢ That the texture of the ground will change.
Protective Measures Against Illusions

Organized formal training is the best protective measure against illusions. It is
recommended that this should be used to educate pilots to recognize:

¢ The illusions are natural phenomena.
¢ Know the different types of illusions and their effects.

« That the supplementation of other visual cues with information from other
sources is the most effective counter to the effects of illusions.

¢ The need for comprehensive flight briefing should the occurrence of illusions be
known to exist or are anticipated at particular geographic locations.

¢ Special care must be taken during accelerations and particular during instrument
flying.

* Head movements, fatigue, night and conditions of reduced visibility are all factors
that can promote visual illusions.

593

AIR REGULATIONS

Disorientation / Vertigo

If you suspect disorientation, concentrate on and believe in aircraft Instruments
in IMC. If in VMC, look out at the Horizon.

Air/Motion Sickness — this mismatch between vestibular and visual sensory
input is the primary cause of spatial disorientation, and indeed of motion sickness.

Vibrations within the frequency band of 1/10 to 2 Hertz are a factor contributing to air-
sickness, because they upset the vestibular apparatus. Symptoms of Motion Sickness:

¢ Nausea and fear

* Hyperventilation

¢ Vomiting

e Pallor

¢ Cold sweating
“ « Headache

¢ Depression
Occasional Motion Sickness May be Relieved by:

e Keeping the head upright and still, if possible using the eyes to
orientate one’s self.

¢ Opening the cockpit ventilators to increase the flow of fresh air.

¢ Using smooth and coordinated control movements and avoiding
manoeuvres which generate pronounced positive or negative G forces.

The Leans. An abrupt correction of a banked attitude, which has been entered too
slowly to stimulate the motion sensing system in the inner ear, can create the illusion
of banking in the opposite direction. The disoriented pilot will roll the aircraft back
into its original dangerous attitude, or if level flight is maintained, will feel compelled
to lean in the perceived vertical plane until this illusion subsides.

Coriolis IMusion. An abrupt head movement in a prolonged constant-rate turn that
has ceased stimulating the motion sensing system can create the illusion of rotation or
movement in an entirely different axis. The disoriented pilot will maneuver the aircraft
into a dangerous attitude in an attempt to stop rotation. This most overwhelming of all
illusions in flight may be prevented by not making sudden, extreme head movements,
particularly while making prolonged constant-rate turns under IFR conditions.

Graveyard Spin. A proper recovery from a spin that has ceased stimulating the
motion sensing system can create the illusion of spinning in the opposite direction.
The disoriented pilot will return the aircraft to its original spin.

Graveyard Spiral. An observed loss of altitude during a coordinated constant-rate
turn that has ceased stimulating the motion sensing system can create the illusion
of being in a descent with the wings level. The disoriented pilot will pull back on the

594

--- Page 304 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

controls, tightening the spiral and increasing the loss of altitude.

Somatogravic Illusion. A rapid acceleration during takeoff can create the illusion of
being in a nose up attitude. The disoriented pilot will push the aircraft into a nose low,
or dive attitude. A rapid deceleration by a quick reduction of the throttles can have the
opposite effect, with the disoriented pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose up, or stall
attitude.

Inversion Illusion. An abrupt change from climb to straight and level flight can
create the illusion of tumbling backwards. The disoriented pilot will push the aircraft
abruptly into a nose low attitude, possibly intensifying this illusion.

Elevator Illusion. An abrupt upward vertical acceleration, usually by an updraft, can
create the illusion of being in a climb. The disoriented pilot will push the aircraft into a
nose low attitude. An abrupt downward vertical acceleration, usually by a downdraft,
has the opposite effect, with the disoriented pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose up
attitude.

False Horizon. Sloping cloud formations, an obscured horizon, a dark scene spread
with ground lights and stars, and certain geometric patterns of ground light can create
illusions of not being aligned correctly with the actual horizon. The disoriented pilot
will place the aircraft in a dangerous attitude.

The Stroboscopic Effect (The Flicker Effect).

An additional type of vertigo is known as Flicker vertigo. Light, flickering at
certain frequencies, from four to twenty times per second, can produce unpleasant and
dangerous reactions in some persons. These reactions may include nausea, dizziness,
unconsciousness, or even reactions similar to an epileptic fit. In a single-engine
propeller aeroplane heading into the sun, the propeller may cut the sun to give this
flashing effect, particularly during landing when the engine is throttled back. These
undesirable effects may be avoided by not staring directly through the prop for more
than a moment, and by making frequent but small changes in RPM. The flickering
light traversing helicopter blades has been known to cause this difficulty, as has the
bounce back from rotating beacons on aircraft which have penetrated clouds. If the
beacon is bothersome, shut it off during these periods.

If a member of the crew or a passenger shows symptoms of the Stroboscopic
Effect, the recommended preventative actions are:

° Turn the aircraft away from the sun.
e Move the person affected to the shade.
¢ Make the individual close eyes.

Disorientation Summary - Remember

¢ Without visual aid, a pilot often interprets centrifugal force as a sensation of
rising or falling.

595

AIR REGULATIONS

e¢ Abrupt head movement during a prolonged constant rate turn in IMC or simulated
instrument conditions can cause pilot disorientation.

° A sloping cloud formation, an obscured horizon, and a dark scene spread with
ground lights and stars can create an illusion known as false horizons.

° An abrupt change from climb to straight and level flight can create the illusion of

tumbling backwards
° A rapid acceleration during takeoff can create the illusion of being in a nose up
attitude
° Symptoms of hypoxia may be difficult to recognize before the pilot’s reactions are
affected.
EXERCISE AND WEIGHT.

A person’s Body Mass Index, or BMI, is simply a measure of a person’s weight in
relation to his height.

Normal : BMI 20 — 25 for men.
BMI 19 — 24 for women.
Body mass Index (BMI = Weight (kgs) / Height? (m)

Regular exercise is beneficial to general health, but the most efficient way to lose
weight is by reducing caloric consumption. To reduce the risk of coronary artery disease,
exercise should be done to double the resting heart rate for at least 20 minutes, three
times a week. Pilots should not try to lose weight by taking appetite suppressants.

Being badly overweight increases a pilot’s susceptibility to the following
conditions.

¢ Heart attack.

¢ Hypertension.

¢ Hypoxia at lower altitudes then normal.

¢ General circulation problems.

¢ Gout (swollen joints). ;

¢ Osteoarthritis (a form of arthritis characterized by gradual loss of cartilage of the
joints).

e Diabetes.

° The inability to tolerate G forces.

¢ — Problems with joints and limbs.

¢ Decompression sickness.

. Heavy sweating.

596

--- Page 305 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

° Chest infections,

° vane veins (a vein that has become swollen and knotted as a result of faulty
alves).

Nutrition and Food Hygiene
Never fly on an empty stomach. A balanced diet is the foundation of good health.
Sources of carbohydrates include: grains, vegetables, nuts, and fruit.

Vitamins. Vitamins are organic substan i
ces required by body to functi
They help process other nutrients to form blood cells. eed ron Properly.

Minerals. Minerals are essential to many vital body processes — from building
strong bones to transmitting nerve impulses. The three major minerals include:

» Calcium — for healthy bones and teeth
» Phosphorous ~ for body’s chemical reaction
» Tron - For Haemoglobin
Contaminated Foodstuffs.
Major causes of food contamination are:
» Unhygienic (i.e unclean) food preparation.
» Undercooked or stale meats.
» Unwashed salads, fruit or vegetables.
» Seafood and locally made ice-creams and mayonnaise.

Pilots suffering from Gastroenteritis are
not fit to fly, even though the
ee . . . . ? y ma, be
taking medicine which is relieving the symptoms. Due to pressure differential, trapped

gases escape at high altitudes resulting in extreme discomfo i
of Gastroenteritis include: mand sickness. Symptoms

» Nausea

» Vomiting

» Abdominal pain
» Loss of appetite

» Diarrhea

PERSONAL HYGIENE

A high standard of personal hysgi i i
ygiene must be practiced if i i
healthy and free from infection. presen the Dody is to remain

597

AIR REGULATIONS

COMMON AILMENTS

The in-flight environment can increase the severity of symptoms which may be
minor whilst on the ground.

If there is any doubt whatsoever in a pilot’s mind about his fitness to fly, he
should stay on the ground.

DRUGS AND SELF MEDICATION

It is absolutely essential that pilots do not fly as part of the operating crew of an
aircraft when taking drugs or medication, unless they have been cleared to do so by an
Aviation medicine Specialist.

A pilot who flies on self-prescribed medication runs the risk of suffering side-
effects and also faces the hazards associated with the underlying illness in the in-flight
environment which can make the symptoms of any illness much more debilitating then
they might be on the ground. The consumption of medicines or other substances may
have consequences on qualification to fly for the following reasons:
¢ The disease requiring a treatment may be cause for disqualification
e Flight conditions may modify the reactions of the body to a treatment.

* Drugs may cause adverse side effects impairing flight safety.

e The effects of medicine do not necessarily immediately disappear when the

treatment is stopped.
CAFFEINE

Caffeine is probably the most widely used drug in the world. It can easily lead to
addiction.

Caffeine is present in coffee, tea, cocoa, chocolate, and fizzy drinks such as cola.

. The recommended maximum caffeine intake per day is approximately 250 — 300

mg corresponding to 2 — 8 cups of coffee.
Anesthetics and Analgesics

A pilot should not fly for at least 12 hours after a local anesthetic and 48 hours
following a general anesthetic.

The more potent forms of analgesics (pain killers) may produce a significant
deterioration in human performance.

Tiredness and Fatigue.

Tiredness and fatigue, though related concepts, differ in their long term physical
effect on the body. To deal with normal tiredness it is sufficient to ensure that periods
of activity and periods of restful sleep comply with the normal pattern for a person's
age and physical condition.

598

--- Page 306 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Ordinary tiredness results from normal physical and/or mental exertion over a
normal waking period. If a person is tired, a good night’s sleep is the only requirement
for that person to be fit the following morning to continue with physical activity.

. Fatigue is a very deep tiredness due to the cumulative effects of a stressful
lifestyle and/or living and working environment.

e The effects of fatigue can be insidious.
e They can creep up slowly on the sufferer.

e The sufferer may be unwilling to recognize or admit that he is suffering from
fatigue.

° Tiredness and fatigue can kill, but fatigue is harder to recognize.

Pilots must be conscious of the symptoms of fatigue and be prepared to both
recognize them and admit to them.

Fatigue can be caused by the following circumstances:

° Long term ill health, either physical or mental.

e¢ Regular sleep deprivation, for whatever reason.

° High levels of stress and/or anxiety over a prolonged period.

e A disturbed body cycle (e.g: jet lag, changing work shift patterns.)
° Long term difficulties in personal or work based relationships.

e A stressful living and /or working environment (e.g: high levels of noise, or
unreasonable physical or mental demands.)

Symptoms of fatigue may be:

° Memory lapses.

° Frequent mistakes in speech and actions.
° Rapid changes of mood.

¢ Diminished awareness.

¢* Tiredness.

¢ Lack of coordination.

A minimum self-help programme could be:
e Accept the fact that you are fatigued.

e Eat a balanced diet and healthy food.

¢ Try to take the stress out of your life.

e« Make sure that you get regular, undisturbed sleep.
* Avoid alcohol and caffeine.

e¢ Always consult a doctor.

599

AIR REGULATIONS

Hypothermia

Normal body temperature averages 98.6 degrees. With hypothermia, core
temperature drops below 95 degrees. In severe hypothermia, core body temperature
can drop to 82 degrees or lower.Hypothermia affects physical and mental abilities.
Shivering makes it possible to combat the cold to a certain extent, but uses up a lot of
energy. In a prolonged exposure, shivering will tend to cease, and be followed by the
onset of apathy. Hypothermia is a potentially life-threatening condition that needs
emergency medical attention.

Acceleration and ‘G’ Forces.

Flying can expose the human body to conditions for which it is not naturally
suited. On the ground, the body is subject to normal gravitational acceleration: “1G”.
this is 32 ft/sec? or 9.81 m/sec’. The reaction of the earth’s surface to this acceleration
gives us the sensation we call “weight”. A pilot will experience 1G in straight and level
flight.

At 60° of bank a pilot is subject to an acceleration of 2G acting vertically through
his seat. His weight will also increase by a factor of 2. This is called the load factor. In
a 70° level turn, the load factor increases to 3.

A typical light aircraft cleared for aerobatics would be stressed to withstand
positive load factors of up to 6.

The adverse effects of increased “G” can be delayed or relieved by tensing the
thigh and stomach and easing off the backward pressure on the control column.

During increased “G” manoeuvres the pilot will feel the following effects:
¢ Increase in body weight.

¢ Mobility is impaired.

e Internal organs displaced.

° Onset of tunnel vision.

° Grey out.

¢ Possible black out.

A tilted back seat can reduce the chance of a black-out during positive
G-manoeuvres.

1.41G is the acceleration experienced in a level turn at 45° angle of bank. In
normal flying, angles of bank greater then this are not usually necessary. Any physical
disorder or immoderate consumption of alcohol or tobacco will reduce the body’s
tolerance to accelerations in excess of 1G.

600

--- Page 307 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Factors adversely affecting G tolerance.

e Alcohol.

¢ Smoking.

e Fatigue.

¢ Excessive heat.
¢ Obesity.

e Sickness.

Negative G

Most pilots can learn to tolerate moderate increases in positive “G”, but many find
even the smallest exposure to negative “G” to be unpleasant. During flight negative “G”
is experienced if, after pulling out of a steep dive, the control column is instinctively
and firmly moved forward because the pilot might feel that he has his nose too high
in an attitude that may lead to a stall. Negative “G” manoeuvres increase the flow of
blood to the head. Blood pressure there increases, the face becomes very flushed, and
the eyes bulge. The combined effect of these symptoms causes what is described as a
“Red out”. To relieve symptoms select normal flying attitude.

Toxic Hazards
Even mild toxic effect can degrade a pilot’s performance and lead to an accident.
Prolonged exposure to toxic influences can damage a person’s general health. Anyone
who has been exposed to any toxic hazard should seek medical assistance as soon as
possible. The following materials may produce toxic hazards:
¢ Furnishings and Baggage.
e Acetone and Turpentine.
° Fuels, Lubricants and propellants.
¢  Anti-icing Fluid.
¢ Fire Extinguishing Agents.
e Battery Fumes.
Dangerous Cargo

Pilots must be aware that they must not carry certain defined items on board
their aircraft. Such items are referred to as dangerous cargo because of the possibility
that their discharge, spillage or breakage may endanger the aircraft and/or crew in
flight or on the ground.

Crew Resource Management

CRM - is the effective use of all available resources for flight crew personnel to
assure a safe and efficient operation, reducing error, avoiding stress and increasing
efficiency.

CRM is concerned not so much with the technical knowledge and skills required

601

AIR REGULATIONS

to fly and operate an aircraft but rather with the cognitive and interpersonal skills
needed to manage the flight within an organised aviation system. In this context,
cognitive skills are defined as the mental processes used for gaining and maintaining
situational awareness, for solving problems and for taking decisions. Interpersonal
skills are regarded as communications and a range of behavioural activities associated
with teamwork. In aviation, as in other walks of life, these skill areas often overlap
with each other, and they also overlap with the required technical skills. Furthermore,
they are not confined to multi-crew aircraft, but also relate to single pilot operations,
which invariably need to interface with other aircraft and with various ground support
agencies in order to complete their missions successfully.

Information Processing

We receive information from the world around us through our senses: sight,
hearing, touch, smell and taste. The “gestalt laws” formulates basic principles
governing how objects are mentally organized and perceived. The basic system by
which we receive and process information in order to make decisions, and recognize
where errors in the system may be the cause of accidents is discussed below.

Basic information processing — a Functional Model

We need to build a functional modal of the various stages of our reasoning. These
stages are:

¢ Detection

¢ Perception

¢ Decision Making

e Action (responses are selected and executed)

¢ Feedback

The model is based on a series of stages that occur between receiving information
and a response being made. The various sections of the model will be discussed both
individually and as part of the full mechanism.

The brain, Central Decision Maker and Response Selection

Once information has been perceived a decision must be made as to the response.
Information is continuously entered into and withdrawn from both the long and short
term memories to assist the decision process. To enable us to carry out multi-tasks we
must learn skills through Motor Programmes.

Motor Programmes (Skills)

Motor Programmes, or “Skills”, are behavioral sub-routines which are learnt
by practice and/or repetition and are held within the long Term Memory and can be
carried out without conscious thought.

In the initial phase of flight training the pilot is competent enough to fly the
aircraft at this stage, but does neither have a great deal of confidence in his/her abilities

nor in the whole system. A pilot is skilled when he trains or practises regularly, knows
how to manage himself/herself and knows how to keep resources in reserve for coping

602

--- Page 308 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

with the unexpected.

Developing Motor Programmes
There are three distinct phases to developing a Motor Programme or skill:

a) The cognitive phase.
b) The associative phase.
c) The automatic phase.

Reflexes
Reflexes occur with little or no involvement of the central nervous system.

Reaction Time

There is a delay between detection, stimulus and muscle contraction called
reaction time. Reaction time depends on the type of reflex action being used. There are
three types of reflex actions. These are:

¢ Unconditioned

¢ Conditioned

¢ Trained
Unconditioned Reflexes. Instinctive natural reflexes, such as blinking.
Conditioned Reflexes. Reflexes that may be learned.

Trained Reflexes. Reflexes that may be increased by repeated practice.

CONCEPTS OF SENSATION
Stimuli

The senses provide stimuli to our brain which has the ability to retain them for a
short time, from the time they arrive. We may not have the processing capacity to deal
with them.

Types of Memory. There are three types of memory:
¢ Sensory memory.
¢ Short-term (or working) memory.
¢ Long-term memory.
Receptors & Sensory Memories. The key features of the sensory memories are:
* There is a separate memory store for each sensory system.
¢ The input decays rapidly.

The sensory stores for sight and sound are important, and knowledge of these is
necessary.

603

AIR REGULATIONS

Information Processing
Model

Rehearsal

Attention Encoding

aed

Sensory Input”

Loss

Decay Displacement Interference
Decay Lost Cues

SENSORY MEMORY FOR SIGHT

The iconic Memory. The iconic Memory is the visual sensory store, it only lasts
for between 0.5 and 1 second. 70-80% of information processed by human is received
through the visual channel.

Sensory Adaptation (Habituation). All sensory adapt, either partially or
completely, to their stimuli after a period of time.

ANTICIPATION

Perception. Perception involves the conversion of the sensory information
received into a meaningful structure.

Sensory information that we expect to receive is more easily perceived and
integrated when it actually occurs, compared with totally unexpected information.

We can ‘perceive’ only that which we can ‘conceive’, but we perceive only a fraction
of the information reaching our senses at any moment.

The process of perception is greatly assisted by our ability to form mental and
three dinensional visual models.

Funneled Perception. Perception of a situation can differ depending upon the
starting of an observer.

Attention. Attention is the deliberate devotion of the cognitive resources to a
specific item.

Choice of Item. Although attention can move very quickly from item to item, it
can only deal with one at a time and thus there is a need for the pilot to consciously
prioritize.

604

--- Page 309 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Attention Mechanisms. The attention mechanism is required because of the
two potentially limiting stages in processing information.

a) There is a limit to the number of items held or maintained in short term
memory (or working memory).

b) Our channel capacity is limited.

The Cocktail Party Effect. ‘The Cocktail Party Effect’ relates to our ability to
hear our own name in a background of many conversations.

Attention. Attention is the process of directing and focusing psychological
resources to enhance perception, performance and mental experience.

Types of attention. There are two types of attention:

Selective Attention. When inputs are sampled continually to decide their
relevance to the present task at hand.

Divided Attention. When our central decision making channel can time-share
between a number of tasks, eg, to execute several mental activities at almost the same
time (i.e. when switching attention from outside the aircraft to the airspeed indicator
on the instrument panel) and to monitor the progress of a motor programme (i.e. flying
or taxiing the airplane) on a relatively subconscious level, while making a radio call at
the same time (requiring a rather conscious level).

Lack of Attention. The major danger for pilots is the poor management of
attention.

AROUSAL

Arousal is a major aspect of many learning theories and is closely related to
other concepts such as anxiety, attention, agitation, stress, and motivation.

Low Arousal. At times, such as in the cruise, our attention can wander with the
result that information is either missed or misinterpreted.

Optimum Arousal. At this level the Central decision maker is at its most
efficient. Too little arousal has an inert affect on the learner, while too much has a
hyper affect. There are optimal levels of arousal for each task to be learned:

¢ lower for more difficult or intellectually (cognitive) tasks

¢ higher for tasks requiring endurance and persistence

High Arousal Overload. At times of high arousal, there is a real danger of
attention becoming narrowed.

Quantitative Overload. A very high workload can be interpreted as ‘Stress’.

605

AIR REGULATIONS

SYMPTOMS OF OVERLOAD

The workload may be said to be acceptable if it requires about 60% of the crew
resources, depend on the pilot’s expertise and correspond to the amount of resources
available.

The most common symptoms are:
» Asharp degradation of performance.
» Funneling of attention or focus.
» Regression.
» Mental “blocking”.
» Mood swings.
» Restlessness and trembling.
» Panic.

Human Reliability. The rate of human error during simple and repetitive tasks
might be expected to be 1 in 100, but after practice, a rate of 1 in 1,000 could be
achieved.

Human reliability can be defined as :- The individual functioning in the
manner in which he or she is supposed to function.

Error Generation. Errors tend to be cumulative.

Short term Memory (Working Memory) 10 to 20 seconds. Short term
memory enables information to be retained for a short period of time. That information
will be lost in 10 to 20 seconds unless it is actively rehearsed and deliberately placed
in our long term memory.

Auditory information is considered easier to retain then visual information as it
is easier to rehearse sounds then data in a visual form.

Limitations of Short Term Memory. The capacity of our short term memory
is limited. The maximum number of unrelated items which can be maintained in the
short term memory is about 7 + 2. Ones this limit is exceeded one or more of the items
are likely to be lost or transposed.

Methods of Increasing Short Term Memory. There are two main tools which
may be used to increase Short Term Memory, ‘Chunking’ and ‘Association’.

Chunking. Breaking items to be remembered into small pieces and remembering
them one at a time.

Association. This technique is used to remember spoken lists of items. A wild
and bizarre association is imagined and attached to each item on the list.

606

--- Page 310 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

LONG TERM MEMORY

Introduction. It is believed that information is stored in the Long Term Memory
for an unlimited time period, although frequently there may be retrieval problems.

° Semantic Memory. Semantic memory stores general knowledge of the
world.

° Episodic Memory. Episodic Memory is a memory of events or ‘episodes’
in our life.

. Procedural Memory. Skills are included within the make-up of the Long
Term Memory.

The Learning Process, Learning is an internal process which allows the mental
acquisition and retention of data Here are some of the types of learning and also brief
examples of those types:

Insight. The data is intellectually and cognitively understood and is retained.
Observational Learning / Imitation. Data from an outside source is replicated.
Experience. Learning from our mistakes.

Skill Learning. Involves motivation, attention, observation, much practice and
corrective feedback.

Retention of Information. This can be increased by the use of:

a) Mnemonics (The practice of improving or helping the memory, or the systems
used to achieve this.)
b) Memory Training
; Motivation. Motivation is the combination of a person’s desire and energy
directed at achieving a goal. It is the cause of action. Motivation can be intrinsic, such
as satisfaction and feelings of achievement; or extrinsic, such as rewards, punishment,
and goal obtainment. Not all people are motivated by the same thing and over time their
motivations might change. The learning process is vastly improved with motivation,
and high performance is rarely achieved without it.

Experience. We all have the ability to learn from our experience and mistakes,
and from those of others.

Response. Any response will cause a detectable change which, in turn, will be
noted by the senses. The feedback may alter the action being taken. Auditory stimuli
(noises) are more likely to attract attention then visual stimuli but they are also more
likely to be responded to in error. An increase in age between 20 and 60 years tends to
lead to slower but more accurate responses.

; Response Error (Error of Commission). If an unexpected stimulus occurs we
will be more likely, under pressure, to make an error of commission.

; Response Times. Response to reaction time is the interval between the onset of
a given signal and the production of a response to that signal.

607

AIR REGULATIONS

Cognition (the mental faculty or process of acquiring knowledge by the
use of reasoning, intuition, or perception) in Aviation. Flight puts the pilot into
an environment which can distort sense organs, and the changed perspective which
is experienced in flight can result in information being presented which is outside the
individual’s expectations.

Hallucination. A hallucination is actually a false perception characterized by a
distortion of real sensory stimuli.

Workload and Limitations. Too high or too low a workload can result in
degraded performance.

Several types of situation may cause mental overload.

Stimuli and Attention. Our bodies are continuously receiving stimuli through
our five senses. This information is stored briefly in our sensory memory and, if we
perceive it to be important, it is transferred to our short-term memory or Central
Decision Maker. Some stimuli are better then others at getting our attention. We can
split our attention between several different things by concentrating on them in rapid
succession.

Judgment & Decision Making. Making good decision is one of the important
aspects of piloting an aircraft. Good decisions can help lead to safe, successful flights,
whereas bad decisions and even indecision have led to many aircraft accidents. Talk to
your instructor and other pilots about different flying situations to obtain advice about
what a good decision would be in a given circumstance. When flying with another pilot,
it is possible to increase the chance of a good decision being made by discussing the
potential problems beforehand. If as an inexperienced pilot you are flying with someone
of more experience and you see him doing something you consider to be dangerous, you
should immediately question their course of action.

A good pilot is one who always realizes there is more to learn. When making a
decision a pilot will be influenced by his previous experience, the probability of an
occurrence and whether the information he is receiving matches that expected.

Risk Assessment. Risk assessment is based on the probability of the risk
occurring and the impact of that risk if it did occur. You will have to weigh up risk and
the possible consequences of the risk in order to determine your course of action.

Remember - Making good decisions is one of the most important aspects of
piloting an aircraft.
Good decisions can help lead to safe, successful flight, whereas bad decisions and even
indecision have led to many aircraft accidents. Always strive to make good decisions.

Personality, Attitude and Behavior. Someone who is too introvert or anxious
may not make a good pilot. Examples of desirable characteristics in pilot are: the
ability to cope with stress and adventure, and the ability to assess and control risks.
As captain of an aircraft you will need to show good leadership skills.

608

--- Page 311 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

While acting as pilot-in-command you should ensure that you stay in command,
you should be properly organized and prepared.

Situational Awareness. A good leader displays good situational awareness
and accurately assess his own performance. The following factors can interfere with
accurate situational awareness:

1. Stress 2. Boredom 3. Fatigue
4. Emotional disturbance 5. Poor communication 6. Interruptions
In order to maintain good situational awareness, gather as much information as
possible. Do not rush into making a decision. Make sure you consider all the options.

Do not make the mistake of seeing something that is not really there just because
you want it to be there.

Mechanics of Decision-making. Pilots operate in a dynamic and constantly
changing environment. A good decision reached a minute ago will not necessarily be
the same good decision in two minutes time.

° Recognize and identify the problem: Decisions are responses to situations or
problems that need addressing. Therefore is important to have a clear definition
of what needs addressing before attempting to go further in the decision making
process.

* Consider the nature of the problem that you are trying to resolve: What is
the type issue, problem, or situation you need to address? Why does the problem
need a decision? What are the results you are hoping to achieve by this decision?

¢ Analyze or research the problem: It is important to gather all the information
involved in the problem or question, so that informed choices can be made.

¢ Develop a list of possible solutions: List the possible decisions that could be
made, and what their consequences would be.

* Select the best alternative: Look at the list drawn up and choose the best
solution for the situation.

* Execute the best choice: Sometimes the hardest part of making a decision is
taking action. The best decisions are ones that deliver strong decision action.

¢ Follow Up and communication: A good decision needs to be followed throughout
its process and constant communication made with those involved.

¢ Feedback: It is extremely important to gather feedback on a decision. This
determines the overall success of and reaction to the decision.

Communication

When piloting an aircraft, whether with passenger, another pilot or an instructor,
good verbal communication will help the flight go more smoothly and contribute to
flight safety.

Concise and unambiguous communication is essential to the safe conduct of air

609

AIR REGULATIONS

traffic. This lesson deals with possible barriers to good communication and good team
work.
Barriers to Communication and Team Work

Several things can be done by team leaders to facilitate good teamwork. In the
end, it is the team leader who takes the decisions on behalf of the team.

Sometimes certain attitudes on the part of both leader and team members build
barriers to communication and can be especially dangerous when flying. Some of the
barriers to communication and team work are:

» Aggressiveness

» Arrogance

» Anti-authoritarian behavior
» Impulsiveness

» Feelings of invulnerability
» Resignation

Expectation. Do not assume you have heard what you are expecting to hear.
Actively Listen.

Clear, concise and unambiguous communication is essential to the safe conduct of
aviation .
Stress

Event and circumstances which cause stress are known as Stress Factors or
Stressors. Stress is recognized as being a natural condition of life. Itis a normal reaction
to demanding situations. A certain amount of stress keeps us aware and vigilant, but
too much stress will degrade physical and intellectual performance.

Stress Tolerance and Arousal

The different stress levels generated within individual persons by a particular
stressor will differ from one individual to another. A moderate level of stress may
improve performance. Stress promotes an increase in physical strength rather than

promoting mental performance.

* The response of a person to the event or circumstances to which he is exposed is
known as arousal.

° Arousal is a measure of a person’s readiness to respond effectively to a given
stress factor.

e Personality, character, training and experience will influence levels of arousal in
a given individual.

The Effects of Stress

In an active, outward-going, highly trained person, too little stimulation or
stress arousal will lead to the onset of boredom and even drowsiness. An introspective,

‘610

--- Page 312 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

if highly aroused, might be unable to function at all, even n

= t person, 1 unal t ioral
Sea aatatieon dint he is competent to deal with. Flying in challenging meteorolog.

y d and experienced p mn
conditions ma be a welcome occurrence for a skille ilot a d
stimulate him to demo: trate extr ary . Cc

Nstr: aordin: skill But su h conditions may cause
unbearable stress in an inexperienced pilot. Training and experience help to ward off

stress and hi h levels of arousal. Successful completion of a stressf ul task will reduce
g

imi i i ises in the future.
the amount of stress experienced when a similar situation arises in t

ors
Stress Factors or Stress / sthepilot
factors are cumulative. Stress occurs under various conditions lik aie

ioe bis p does not immediately havea solution or inexper:

must reviso Bis PA Gtlonal det heir individual capabilities. Stress may

j ituational demands exceed their in f ay
anne i. i nes convineed that he will not be able to find a solution for the problem
occur

just is confronted with.

Stress causes mental blocks, confusion, Paatien
frustration, rage, deterioration in motor coordination,

channelized attention, resignation,
high pitch voice and fast

speaking. . .
Thorough flight planning is the key to reducing cockpit workload.

ousekeeping is of a high order and that all documents,

e that cockpit h S 1 l ments,
chartpond associated equipment are appropriately stored and accessible, in acco

: aor : fety.
with the principles of flight sa . ne
High quality headsets will reduce cockpit noise levels. Temperature can often
regulated using the cabin heating or ventilation system. wat
and fly well inside them. If you are aware tha’

To avoid ress poeider ether it would not be wiser for you to stay on the

i hethe
ou are under stress consider w ;
pround rather then to fly when you are not up to it.

ife Stresses : t their
“ Pilots suffering from life stresses should be aware that this oan Senda
tration and performance when at the controls oan selchild, divorce, marital
orden in which the factors affect a person ATM: feat ° jImness, snarriage loss of job
. in] ness ’ >
; f a close family member, injury / 1 =. ‘blings
separation, seat oie sexual problems, birth, change of financial ain eae
foaving hae change of eating habits, change of residence, loan/de' ’
eavin, ,

vacations and minor violations of law.
Indications of stress

Easily observable indications of str
pupils and fast breathing.

ess are perspiration, flushed skin, dilated

see ote s “The technique of controlling an apparatus,

efinitions of automation i ; 6 i artes.
en One toma by means of electronic and/or mechanical devices te rep!
the buman organism in the sensing, decision-making and deliberate output .

611

AIR REGULATIONS

The safety philosophy behind the adoption of increasing onboard automation is
based on the assumption that human error is the main cause of accidents. Therefore,
since the human (liveware) component of the system is the flawed link in the accident

chain, we ought to look for a substitute capable of handling the tasks once performed
by pilots.

Pilots, computers and machines are not alternatives, but complementary factors

in ensuring flight safety. Achieving the correct balance between these components of
the aviation domain benefits safety.

Automation has undeniably led to an improvement in flight safety.

Nevertheless, a few accidents point to a mismatch between automation and the
human element. Studies have been done to determine whether automation is suitable
in it’s present form or some thing more is to be done. Nine categories were identified
to focus on. These are situation awareness, automation complacency, automation
intimidation, captain’s command authority, crew interface design, pilot selection,
training and procedures, the role of pilots in automated aircrafts.

The studies have concluded that there is a scope for improvements in fields like

human capabilities and limitations, ergonomics, cognitive suitability and instrument
standardization.

Although cockpit automation may provide pilots with more time to think, it may

encourage pilots to reinvest only some of this mental free time in thinking flight-
related thoughts.

A high degree of cockpit automation may therefore alter the traditional tasks of
the pilots in a way, that the attention of the cockpit crew will become reduced with the
consequence of ‘being out of the loop’.

THE CIRCADIAN CIRCLE

The Circadian Circle represents our level of alertness throughout the day.
Circadian rhythms are internally generated by a self-sustaining or autonomous
biological clock located in the hypothalamus which functions as the main control
centre for the autonomic nervous system by regulating sleep cycles, body temperature,
appetite, etc., and that acts as an endocrine gland by producing hormones. It takes
into account, biological elements such as our body temperature, heart rate and blood
pressure. These elements effect our level of alertness during the course of a day.

Human performance degradation at circadian lows is one of the major challenges for
the aviation industry.

The picture below shows the normal results of an average person during a normal
day. As we sleep, our heart rate is lowered and hence as seen on the graph, our level of
alertness is reduced. Other things that may reduce our level of alertness also include
that of our blood pressure which is often lowered after meal times. It is generally

accepted that human performance declines at night, when the body and mind desire
rest.

612

--- Page 313 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Pilots flying across different time zones through the night, are not able to fully
apply the Circadian Cycle without understanding or adjusting it. By understanding
how our alertness is effected, we can then make adjustments to our diet and sleep to
ensure a safe level of alertness in the cockpit.

Following factors should be taken into account by pilots engaged in flights across
several time zones: :

¢ In the absence of all time cues (Free running circadian rhythms), the biological
clock has a natural cycle of about 25 hours. With normal cues, however, the
biological clock is reset each day such that it is a synchrony with the solar day.
The human circadian rhythm is based on a cycle of about 24 hours.

¢ — The biological clock and the associated circadian variations adapt slowly following
changes in the work schedule and following trans meridian flights. Concerning
circadian rhythm disruption (jet lag), the effects of adjustment to destination
time may vary greatly between individuals.

e If a stop-over is more than 24 hours, the correct action is to move to the new time
as soon as possible.

e¢ In order to minimize the effects of crossing more than 3-4 time zones with a
layover more than 24 hours, it is advisable to keep in swing with the rhythm of
the departure country for as long as possible and maintain regular living patterns
(waking, sleeping alternation and regular meal patterns).

. The physiological rhythms of a pilot in a new time zone will re-synchronise to this
new time zone at a rate of about 1 - 1.5 hours a day.

e  Adaption after eastbound travel is about 50 percent slower than after westbound

613

AIR REGULATIONS

flight -- adaption time following eastbound travel is about 1.5 days for each time
zone change whereas adaption time following westbound travel is about one day
for each time zone change.

¢ — Inorder to completely re-synchronise with local time after zone crossing, circadian
rhythms require less time when flying from east to west. The readjustment of
the biological rhythms after a time shift is normally more difficult with flights
towards the east.

° The duration of a period of sleep is governed primarily by the point within your
circadian rhythm at which you try to sleep.

. Sensorimotor performance is better in the evening whereas intellectual
performance is better in the morning.

SLEEP

Sleep is basically divided into two components. Rapid Eye Movement (REM)
sleep and Non-Rapid Eye Movement (NREM) sleep. The purpose of NREM sleep is
body restoration while that of the REM sleep is brain restoration by strengthening,
refreshing and organizing memory. NREM sleep is further divided into four stages
from the lightest to the deepest. Both type of sleeps are required to recoup physical and
mental energy.

NREM SLEEP — STAGE 1

The transition phase between wakefulness and sleep takes 10 minutes each time.
The brain activity, eye movement and muscle activity become slower. A person is easily
awoken. Waking up in this stage of sleep will cause a person to feel that he/she has not
slept.

NREM SLEEP -- STAGE 2

Light sleep, first stage of true sleep lasts from 10-25 minutes each time. Occupies
50% of the sleep patterns, the brain activity, eye movement become even slower and
the cardiac activity decreases.

NREM SLEEP — STAGE 3

The beginning of deep sleep, slow-wave delta sleep. The brain activity and eye
movement are approaching zero. If a person is awoken in this stage of sleep, he/she
may feel groggy and disoriented for a few minutes.

NREM SLEEP -- STAGE 4

Deep sleep, slow-wave delta sleep. No eye movement or muscle activity. If a
person is awoken in this stage of sleep, he/she may feel groggy or disoriented for a few
minutes.

REM SLEEP (Paradoxical sleep)

Usually occurs 70-90 minutes into a sleep. Happens in cycles lasting for
approximately 10 minutes initially to 1 hour. The eye moves rapidly from side to side
and the brain wave form is similar to that when a person is awake. The dreams occur.
As we grow older, the time spent in REM sleep declines from 50% of our sleep for
infants, to 20% of our sleep for adults.

614

--- Page 314 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Understanding the different stages of sleep and the importance of sleep, we can
plan ahead to ensure we receive the required amount of sleep for recovery. Remember:

e The effects of sleep deprivation on performance increase with altitude and with
higher workload.

* During paradoxical sleep rapid eye movements can be observed.

e¢ The duration of a period of sleep is governed primarily by the point within your
circadian rhythm at which you try to sleep.

¢« Deep sleep allows for physical recovery and the reconstitution of neuron energy
reserves.

° Lack of sleep increases fatigue, concentration and attention. It has risks of
sensory illusions and mood disorders. The disruption of sleeping patterns can
lead to symptoms of drowsiness, irritability and lack of concentration will make
an individual more prone to make errors.

¢ A person experiencing sleep loss is unlikely to be aware of personal performance
degradation. Performance loss may be present up to 20 minutes after awaking
from a short sleep (nap).

e« The sleep cycles repeat during the course of a night’s sleep. Each succeeding cycle
contains a greater amount of REP sleep. Frequent interruption of the REP sleep
can harm a human being in the long run. REM sleep is more important for the
regeneration of mental and physical functions than all the other sleep stages are.

THE SHEL MODEL IN AVIATION

The SHEL model is a conceptual model of human factors that clarifies the scope
of aviation human factors and assists in understanding the human factor relationships
between aviation system resources/environment (the flying subsystem) and the human
component in the aviation system (the human subsystem).

The SHEL model provides a conceptual framework to help understand Human
Factors. It illustrates the various constituents and the interfaces- or points of
interaction- which comprise the subject. Human Factors elements can be divided into
four basic conceptual categories:

S = Software —- Procedures, manuals, checklist layouts, documents, zymology,
computer programmes, maps and charts.

H = Hardware - Design of flight decks, physical structure of the aircraft,
presentation of instruments, positioning and operating sense of controls, machinery,
equipment, etc.

E = Environment - Both internal and external to the Workplace

L = Liveware - Man, the most critical, valuable and flexible component of the
system.

L=Liveware - The second ‘L’ represents other humans in contact with the pilot.

615

AIR REGULATIONS

Interactions between human beings and other elements of the SHEL model are at
the heart of Human Factors, which involves the interface between:

~ Humans and machines “ Liveware-Hardware”
~ Humans and materials “ Liveware —Software”
~ Humans and their colleagues “ Liveware ~ Liveware”

~ Humans and the operating environment “Liveware- Environment”.

fle

in this model the match or
S = Sattware (procedures, mismatch of the blocks (interface)
symbology, ete.) is just as important as the
H & Hertware (machina) cha racteriatica of the blocks
E = Environment themaaives. A mismatch cen be
L. = Livenvara [hurman) @ spurce of human arrar.

The liveware (human element) is the hub of the SHEL model. The remaining
components must be adapted and matched to this central component.

In this model the match or mismatch of the blocks (interface) is just as important
as the characteristics of the blocks themselves. A mismatch can be a source of human
error leading to an accident or an incident.

Humans are subjected to considerable variation in the performance and suffer
many limitations, most of which are now predictable. The Liveware; the human
element must be carefully matched to other components of the system to avoid the
stress in the system and eventual breakdown.

Hence, the operation well being of the aviation personnel is an important industry
need. Many factors influence the personnel, viz. Physical, physiological, psychological,
psychological, psychosocial. However the effect of physiological and psychosocial
factors is more pronounced.

Hardware, Design of Flight Decks, Size and Anthropometry. Murphy’s law
states if equipment is designed in such a way that it can be operated wrongly, then
sooner or later, it will be. Therefore a great deal of attention is required to design the
equipment.

616

--- Page 315 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Anthropometry. This is the study of the human measurement. The information
is grouped into:

¢ Static measurements.
¢ Dynamic measurements.
* Contour surface measurements.

It is not practical to design a cockpit for both the very short and the very tall
individual. Those in the central 90% of size distribution will be catered for.

Eye Datum. Cockpit space must be designed around a defined position of the
pilot’s eye. This may be called the Eye Datum, the Design Eye Position or the
Reference Eye Point.

Too high, poor view of instruments, and obstructed high view. Good downward
view. Just right, optimum view of outside and instruments.

Too low, good view of instruments but poor forward and downward view. Once the
design eye position has been set, the size of the cockpit can be established.

Design of Cockpit Seats. It is of the utmost importance that the seating is
comfortable and adjustable to the individual! pilot’s size and shape. Pilots should adjust
their seats to establish a comfortable position giving full control movement, with
optimum instrument scan and outside visibility. This position should be used for all
phases of the flight. Restraint should be provided by a 5 point harness with a negative
‘@’ strap.

Hardware, Displays.

Presentation Requirements. The basic choice for type of instrument display is
between a digital or an analogue display. Experiments have shown that for the display
of purely quantitative information, digital displays give better results. For displaying
qualitative information an analogue display provides more easily assessed information.

Conventional Analogue Standard ‘T’ Display. A standard ‘T’ layout has
artificial horizon or attitude indicator at the centre with the altimeter, airspeed
indicator and direction indicator grouped around it.

Digital Display and the Compass. The conventional analogue type compass
card gives a better picture of the aircraft orientation then would a digital readout.

Combination or Analogue and Digital Displays. In some instances both
digital information and analogue information can be combined in a single instrument.

The three Pointer Altimeter. The three pointer altimeter can easily be misread
and produce significantly more reading errors than the single pointer altimeter.

Hardware, Controls, Basic Considerations. There are certain basic
considerations which govern the way controls should be both designed and arranged.

Standardization. Control location and sense of use from one aircraft to another
should be standardized.

617

AIR REGULATIONS

Frequency of Use. Controls used frequently or for protracted periods should be
located so that they do not require the pilot to adopt an awkward or fatiguing position.

Sequence of Use. Controls that should normally be used in a given order should
be laid out so that the sequence of use is represented in that layout.

Importance. Important controls must be located in easily reached and
unobstructed positions.

Visual / Tactile Dissimilarity. Switches and knobs that control different
systems or functions should look and feel different from each other.

Symbolism. Controls, if possible, should be designed to contain some reference
to their function.

Simultaneous Use. Those controls which may require simultaneous use should
be located in order to enable this to take place.

Warnings. It is essential that all warnings should be ‘attention getting’
without being startling. The most conspicuous visual warnings rely on head and gaze
orientation.

618

--- Page 316 ---

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

QUESTIONS

The atmosphere contains the following gases:

A) 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.03% carbon dioxide, rest rare gases
B) 78% helium, 21% oxygen, 0.03% carbon dioxide, rest: rare gases
C) 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 1% carbon monoxide, rest: rare gases

The volume percentage of oxygen in the atmosphere is 21% which
A) _ Is constant for all altitudes conventional airplanes can reach

B) Decreases with increasing altitude

C) _ Increases with increasing altitude

Oxygen, combined with hemoglobin in blood is transported by
A) Platelets

B) Red blood cells

C) White blood cells

One of the most dangerous symptoms of hypoxia concerning flight safety is:
A) — Hyperventilation, causing emotional stress

B) Impaired judgement, disabling the pilot to recognize the symptoms

C) Reduced coordination of limb movements, causing the pilot to spin

One of the most frequent symptom(s) of decompression sickness emerging
after a decompression in airline operation

A) Are the bends

B) Isashock

C) Are neurological damages to the CNS

The cabin pressure in airline operation is

A) Normally not exceeding 4000 to 5000feet
B) Normally not exceeding 2000 to 3000feet
C) Normally not exceeding 6000 to 8000feet

What is the Time of Useful Consciousness?

A) _ The length of time during which an individual can act with both mental and
physical efficiency and alertness, measured from the moment at which he
loses his available oxygen supply

B) The time taken to become aware of hypoxia due to gradual decompression

C) The period of time between the start of hypoxia and the moment that the pilot
becomes aware of it

619

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

AIR REGULATIONS

You can overcome hyperventilation by breathing into a plastic or paper bag.
The intention is:

A) To reduce blood pressure

B) Toincrease the amount of nitrogen in the lung

C)  Toraise the level of CO2 in the blood as fast as possible

Which phenomenon is common to hypoxia and hyperventilation?
A) Severe headache

B) Tingling sensations in arms or legs

C) Cyanosis (blueing of lips and finger-nails)

The risk of a baretrauma of the middle ear is more likely to occur
A) With colds and slow ascents

B) With colds and rapid descents

C) With colds and fast climbs

The purpose of cabin pressurisation system is:

A) Band C are correct.

B) Reduce gastrointestinal- trapped gas-, middle ear- and sinus- problems.

C) To allow the crew and passengers to move about freely in a comfortable
environment, unencumbered by oxygen masks or other life support equipment.

Flickering light when reflected from spinning rotor blades

A) Can be neglected

B) Can cause spatial disorientation and/or nausea, when looked at for a longer
period of time

C) Should be avoided, because it may destroy the optical nerve

Presbyopia is:

A) Far sightedness linked with age
B) Short sightedness

C) Myopia

Scanning at night should be performed by:

“) Scanning with one eye open

B) — Slight eye movement to the side of the object

C) Concentrated fixation on an object (image must fall on the fovea centralis)

620

--- Page 317 ---

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21,

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

A pilot approaching a runway which is narrower than normal may feel he is at

“a greater height than he actually is. To compensate he may fly a

A) _ Flatter than normal approach with the tendency to undershoot
B) Higher than normal approach with the tendency to overshoot
C) Compensatory glide path and stall out

Spatial disorientation will be most likely to occur during flight:

A) When flying in and out of clouds and the pilot maintains good instrument cross
check

B) When flying in light rain below the ceiling

C) Ifthe brain receives conflicting informations and the pilot does not believe the
instruments

Hypoxia will effect night vision:

A) At 5000 ft.

B) Less than day vision.

C) And causes the autokinetic phenomena.

What is meant by the term Incapacitation?

A) When situational awareness of the crew is too low.

B) The effect of gastro - intestinal upset.

C) The gradual or sudden loss of a crew members ability to function.

In the short-term-memory, information is stored for approximately
A) 20 seconds

B) acouple of days

C) 1 hour

Concerning the relation between performance and stress, which of the following

statement(s) is (are) correct?

A) Domestic stress will not affect the pilot's performance because he is able to
leave this type of stress on the ground

B) Amoderate level of stress may improve performance

C)  Astudent will learn faster and better under severe stress

The main preoccupation in modern airline operations should be:
A) _ Efficient utilisation of resources.

B) Maximum utilisation of resources.

C) = Safety.

621

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

AIR REGULATIONS

The elements of the SHEL model are:

A) Software, hardware, electronics and livewire.

B) Shareware, hardware, education and limitations.
C) Software, hardware, environment and liveware.

The rate and depth of breathing is primary regulated by the concentration of:
A) water vapour in the alveoli

B) oxygen in the cells

C) carbon dioxide in the blood

Pulse rate is influenced by the following factors:

1. Adrenalin 2. Cortisol 3. Physical exercise.
A) 1,3 are correct, 2 is false

B)  1,2,3 are correct

C) 2,3 are correct, 1 is false

Which of the following statements is true?

A) People are capable of living without stress.

B) Stressors accumulate thus increasing the likelinood to exhaustion.
C) Stressors are independent from each other.

Motor programmes are:

A) _ rules that enable us to deal with preconceived situations

B) _ stored routines that enable patterns of behaviour to be executed only under
continuous conscious control

C) stored routines that enable patterns of behaviour to be executed without
continuous conscious control

What optimises crew co-operation ?

1. Sharing and common task

2. Confidence in each others capability

3. Precise definition of functions associated with each crew members role

A) 1,2
B) 2,3
C) = 1,2,3

What should a pilot do to keep his night vision (scotopic vision)?
A) Select meals with high contents of vitamin B and C

B ) Not smoke before start and during flight and avoid flash blindness
C ) Wait at least 60 minutes to night-adapt before he takes off

622

--- Page 318 ---

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Between which components is an interface mismatch causing stress due to
poor cockpit design, thus leading to reduced human performance?

A) _ Liveware — Software

B) _Liveware — Liveware

C) __Liveware - Hardware

Which of the following sentences concerning crew performance is correct?

A) Mistakes can always be detected and corrected by the individual, hence to
much practice is not needed. ;

B) The quality of crew-performance is not dependent on the arousal level of the
individual.

C) The quality of crew-performance depends on the practice done to improve
reliability.

Pilots are more easily inclined to make mistakes when:

A) making decisions independently of others

B) _ they are not constrained by time

C) _ they are not able to assess and control the risks involved in a situation

Low levels of arousal are:

A) good on final approach

B) not good on final approach
C) good for general flying

The amount of light which strikes the retina is controlled by:
A) _ the cornea

B) the lens

C) _ the pupil

Which of the following statements in regard to motivation is correct?

A) Too much motivation may result in hypo vigilance and thus in a decrease in
attention

B) Motivation will reduce the task automation process hence performance will
degrade

C) The learning process is vastly improved with motivation

623

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

AIR REGULATIONS

Five hours after a rapid decompression at FL 320 you experience pain in the

joints. Which of following answers is correct?

A) This symptom indicates decompression sickness and will disappear with in 24
hours.

B) This phenomenon is treated by breathing 100% oxygen under pressure.

C) You should ask for medical advice (flight surgeon) since this is a symptom of
decompression sickness.

Ahigh degree of cockpit automation may alter the traditional tasks of the pilots

in a way, that

A) _ the crew always maintains situational awareness by being more alert.

B) the crew pays more attention to be always in loop.

C) _ the attention of the cockpit crew will become reduced with the consequence of
‘being out of the loop’.

Long-term memory is an essential component of the pilot’s knowledge and

expertise.

A) The information stored in long-term memory is always fresh and easy to
retrieve.

B) _ Itis desirable to pre-activate knowledge stored in long-term memory to have it
available when required

C) The capacity of long-term memory is limited to a few weeks.

The human information processing system is highly efficient compared to
computers because of its

A) speed
B) working memory capacity
C) _ flexibility

What are easily observable indications of stress?

A) _ Rising of the blood pressure, pupils narrowing, stabbing pain around the heart.
B) _Perspiration, flushed skin, dilated pupils, fast breathing.

C) Faster, deep inhalation, stabbing pain around the heart.

CRM (Crew Resource Management) training is:

A) _ intended to develop effectiveness of crew performance by improving attitudes
towards flight safety and human relationship management.

B) not intended to change the individual's attitude towards other crew members.

C) _ intended to alter an individual's stress management capabilities.

624

--- Page 319 ---

41.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

As a result of automation in cockpits,

A) coordination between the members is facilitated by the provision of more
precise and more important information

B) communication and coordination call for an even greater effort on the part of
the crew members

C) man-man communication has been significantly improved

Which statement is correct ?

A) Oxygen diffusion from the lungs into the blood does not depend on partial
oxygen pressure.

B) Oxygen diffusion from the blood into the cells depends on their partial oxygen
pressure gradient.

C ) The gradient of diffusion is higher at altitude than it is at sea level

A pilot after pulling out of a steep dive, moves the control column instinctively
and firmly forward may suffer a:

A) Grey Out
B) Black Out
C) Red Out

A pilot has flown an aircraft as a Captain for 1000 hrs. With what phase of
motor programme he can be associated with?

A) Automatic

B) Cognitive

C) Associate

Too low a workload can:

A) Degrade performance

B) Enhance arousal

C) Help plan future activities better

In civil air transport, linear accelerations (Gx):- 1: do not exist; 2: have slight
physiological consequences; 3: may, in the case of pull-out, lead to loss of
consciousness; 4: cause sensory illusions on the pitch axis

A) 1,4
B) 2
Cc) 34

625

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

AIR REGULATIONS

Thinking on human reliability is changing.

A) Human errors can be avoided. All it takes is to be vigilant and to extend one’s
knowledge

B) It is thought that it will be possible to eliminate errors in the near future

C) Human errors are now considered as being inherent to the cognitive function
of human and are generally inescapable

Gases of physiological importance to man are:
A) oxygen and carbon dioxide

B) nitrogen and carbon dioxide

C) oxygen and carbon monoxide

You can survive at any altitude, provided that

A) enough oxygen, pressure and heat is available

B) 21% oxygen is available in the air you breath in
C) pressure respiration is guaranteed for that altitude

Fatigue and permanent concentration
A) _ increase the tolerance to hypoxia
B) lower the tolerance to hypoxia

C) donot affect hypoxia at all

An increase in the amount of carbon dioxide in the blood leads to:
A)  adecrease of acidity in the blood

B) areduction of red blood cells

C) _ shortness of breath

The total pressure of a mixture of gases is equal to the sum of the partial
pressures of the gases which compose the mixture corresponds to:

A) Henry's law

B) Dalton’s law

C)  Graham’s law

The barometric pressure has dropped to 1/2 of the pressure at sea level at
A) 10000 feet
B) 18000 feet
C) 25000 feet

626

--- Page 320 ---

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Boyle’s law is directly applicable in case of:

A) _ the expansion of trapped gasses in the human body with increasing altitude
B) _ the occurance of decompression sickness at high altitude

C) hyperventilation with increasing altitude

Dalton’s law explains the occurance of :
A) bends

B) creeps

C) altitude hypoxia

The respiratory process consists mainly of

A) _ the diffusion of oxygen through the respiratory membranes into the blood,
transportation to the cells, diffusion into the cells and elimination of carbon
dioxide from the body

B) _ the transportation of oxygen to the cell and the elimination of carbon monoxide

C) _ the transportation of oxygen to the cell and the elimination of nitrogen

Carbon monoxide poisoning

A) _ occurs only above 15 degrees OAT

B) _ ismore likely to occur in aeroplanes where the cabin heat is technically supplied
by coating the exhaust

C) _ is more likely to occur in aeroplanes with twin-engines because of high engine
efficiency

In the following list you will find several symptoms listed for hypoxia and
carbon monoxide poisoning. Please mark those referring to carbon monoxide
poisoning.

A) Muscular spasms, mental confusion, impairment of hearing.

B) High levels of arousal, increased error proneness, lack of accuracy.

C) Headache, increasing nausea, dizziness.

A pilot, climbing in a non-pressurised aircraft and without using supplemental
oxygen will pass the “critical threshold” at approximately:

A) 16000 ft
B) 18 000ft
C) 22000

627

60.

61.

62.

63.

64,

66.

AIR REGULATIONS

Breathing 100% OXYGEN will lift the pilot’s physiological safe altitude to
approximately:

A) 38000ft
B) 10000
C) 22000ft

The most dangerous symptoms of hypoxia at altitude are
A) _ breathlessness and reduced night vision

B) — euphoria and impairment of judgement

C) hyperventilation

To safely supply the crew with oxygen, at which altitude is it necessary to
breathe 100% oxygen pius pressure after a rapid decompression?

A) Approximately 33 000 ft.

B) Approximately 38 000 ft.

C) Approximately 45 000 ft.

When the pilot suffers from hypothermia (loss of cabin heating):

A) _ his oxygen need will not be affected

B) his oxygen need will be raised and his tolerance to hypoxia will be increased
C) _ his need for oxygen will be increased as long as he stays conscious

“Tunnel vision” (loss of peripherical vision) can be observed if a pilot is
subjected to more than:

A) +3.5Gy

B) -3.5Gz

C) +3.5G6z

“Grey out” can be observed if a pilot is subjected to more than:
A) +3Gz

B) --3Gz

C) +3Gy

How can a pilot increase his tolerance to +Gz ?

A) Relax the muscles, ducking the head and lean upper body forward.

B) Tightening of muscles, ducking the head and perform a kind of pressure
breathing.

C) Take an upright seat position.

628

--- Page 321 ---

67.

69.

70.

71.

72.

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

A passenger complains about a painful inflated belly at 8.000 feet. You advise
him to: 1; unbuckle and massage the belly; 2: stand up and let go the gases
out of the intestines; 3; eat less gas forming food and avoid carbonhydrated
beverages before flight in the future; 4: drink a lot of water throughout the flight
A) 1,2 and 4 are correct
B) 1,2 and 3 are correct
C) 1 and 3 not advisable

in the pulmonary artery there is :

A) oxygen poor and carbon dioxide rich blood
B) oxygen poor and carbon dioxide poor blood
C) oxygen rich and carbon dioxide rich blood

The transfer of carbon dioxide from the blood to the alveoli can be described
by:

A) Boyles Law

B) Dalton’s Law

C) _ the law of diffusion

Some hours after a rapid decompression at FL 300 you experience pain in the

joints. Which of following answers is correct?

A) This symptom indicates decompression sickness and will disappear when you
take some exercise.

B) You should ask for medical advice since this is a symptom of decompression
sickness.

C) This phenomenon is treated by breathing 100% nitrogen.

Which symptom does not belong to the following list:

A) leans
B) bends
C) chokes

Which of the following statements is correct?

A) Hearing is the sense which collects most information in man

B) 70% of information processed by man enters via the visual channel
C) 40% of information processed by man enters via the visual channel

629

73.

74,

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

AIR REGULATIONS

Adaptation is

A) _ the adjustment of the crystalline lens to focus light on the retina
B) _ the change of the diameter of the pupil

C) the adjustment of the eyes to high or low levels of illumination

Scanning at night should be performed by:

A) _ slight eye movements to the side of the object

B) concentrated fixation on an object (image must fall on the fovea centralis)
C) avoiding food containing Vitamin A

To prevent the “autokinetic phenomena”, the following can be done:

A) _ fixate the source of light, first with one eye, then with the other

B) look sideways to the source of light for better fixation

C) look out for additional references inside and/or outside the cockpit using
peripheral vision also

The time an eye needs to adapt fully to the dark is about:
A) 30 minutes

B) 7 minutes

C) 15 minutes

The part(s) of the eye responsible for night vision
A) are the cones and rods

B) _ is the cornea

C)  arerods

Empty field myopia is caused by:
A) atmospheric perspective

B) _ lack of distant focal points

C) _ flying over mountainous terrain

The human ear is capable of perceiving vibrations between the frequencies
A) 10-16 Hz

B)  16- 20,000 Hz

C) 20,000 - 42,000 Hz

What is understood by air-sickness?

A) A sensory conflict within the vestibular system accompanied by nausea,
vomiting and fear

B) Anillness caused by evaporation of gases in the blood

C)  Anillness caused by an infection of the middle ear

630

--- Page 322 ---

81.

82.

83.

84,

85.

86.

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

Approaches at night without visual references on the ground and no landing
aids (e.g. VASIS) can make the pilot believe of being

A) _ lower than actual altitude with the risk of ducking under

B) _ lower than actual altitude with the risk of overshooting

C) _ higher than actual altitude with the risk of landing short (““ducking under”)

Orientation in flight is accomplished by 1: eyes; 2: utriculus and sacculus;
3: semicircular canals; 4: Seat-of-the-pants-Sense

A) _ only 1 and 4 are correct

B) 1, 2, 3 and 4 are correct

C) 1,2, 3 and 4 are false, only 1 is correct

What can a pilot do to avoid “Flicker vertigo” when flying in the clouds?
A) Switch strobe-lights off

B) Dim the cockpit lights to avoid reflections

C) Engage the autopilot until breaking the clouds

During flight in IMC, the most reliable sense which should be used to overcome
illusions is the:

A)  ‘“Seat-of-the-pants-Sense”

B) _ visual sense by looking outside

C) visual sense, interpreting the attitude indicator

It is inadvisable to fly when suffering from a cold. The reason for this is:

A) _ the tissue around the nasal end of the Eustachian tube is likely to be swollen
thus causing difficulty in equalising the pressure within the middle ear and
the nasal/throat area. Pain and damage to the eardrum can result, particularly
during fast descents

B) although the change in air pressure during a climb at lower altitudes is very
small, it increases rapidly at high altitudes. If the tissue in the Eustachian tube
of the ear is swollen, gentie descents at high ailtitude would resuit in damage
to the ear drum

C) _ swollen tissue in the inner ear will increase the rate of metabolic production
resulting in hyperventilation

The metabolisation of alcohol

A) _ is quicker when used to it

B) _ is a question of time

C) canbe influenced by easy to get medication

631

87.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

AIR REGULATIONS

The first stage in the information process is
A) _ perception

B) the recognition of information

C) — sensory stimulation

Motor programmes are:

A) _ stored routines that enable patterns of behaviour to be executed without
continuous conscious control

B) rules that enable us to deal with preconceived situations

C) _ stored routines that enable patterns of behaviour to be executed only under
continuous conscious control

Which of the following human error rates can be described as both realistic
and pretty good, after methodical training

A) 1in 10 times

B) 1in 100 times

C) 1in1000 times

Acute stress quickly leads to

A) _adecrease in the amount of resources mobilized to face the situation
B) _astate of over activation beyond the control of willpower

C) the mobilizatioan of resources required to cope with the stressor

In a complex task high levels of arousal
A) _ reduce failures

B) lead to better decision-making

C) narrows the span of attention

If during flight a pilot is in a mental condition of “optimum arousal” he/she will
be:

A) unprepared to handle a difficult situation

B) prepared best to cope with a difficult task

C) in aconfused mental state

Experiencing stress depends on:

A) _ the individual interpretation of the situation

B) _ the fragility of individuals to certain types of stimulation
C) _ the individual's state of tiredness

632

--- Page 323 ---

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

What is the effect of tiredness on attention?

A) _ It increases the ability to manage multiple matters

B) It leads to one’s attention being dispersed between different centres of interest
C) It reduces the ability to manage multiple matters

In order to completely resynchronise with local time after zone crossing,
circadian rhythms require

A) about one week per 2.5 hours of time shift

B) _ less time when flying from east to west

C) about one day per 2.5 hours of time shift

During paradoxical sleep

A) rapid eye movements can be observed

B) _ the tone of the muscles is similar to that in the waking state
C) _ the rhythm of the heart is very regular

The physiological rhythms of a pilot in a new time zone will resynchronise to
this new time zone at a rate of about

A) 2-2.5 hours a day

B) 3-4.5 hours a day.

C) 1-1.5 hours a day

The duration of a period of sleep is governed primarily by

A) _ the point within your circadian rhythm at which you try to sleep
B) the amount of time you have been awake

C) the number of points you have in your ‘credit/deficit’ system

Ahigh degree of cockpit automation may alter the traditional tasks of the pilots

in a way, that

A) _ itis guaranteed that the crew maintains always situational awareness

B) _ the attention of the cockpit crew will become reduced with the consequence of
‘being out of the loop’

C) _ the crew can pay more attention to solve the problem in an abnormal situation
without monitoring the automatic systems

633

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

AIR REGULATIONS

Which of the following drawbacks are associated with automation?
1: Reduced in manually controlling the aircraft; 2: Increased likelihood of slips
while programming automatic systems; 3: Difficulties in adapting to the use of
a sidestick; 4: General decrease in technical reliability

A) 2,3,4
B) 1,3
Cc) 1,2

Attitudes are defined as:

A) tendencies to respond to people, institutions or events either positively or
negatively

B) _ the conditions necessary for carrying out an activity

C) asynonym for behaviou

Disturbance of the biological clock appears after a: 1: bad night’s sleep; 2: day
flight Delhi-London; 3: day flight Dethi-Colombo; 4: night flight London-Delhi
A) 1,2 and 3 are correct

B) 1 and 3 are correct

C) 2and4 are correct

Flying from Bengaluru to Moscow you will have a lay-over of 4 days. What time
measure is relevant for your circadian rhythm on the 3rd day?

A) ZT (zonal time).

B) LT (local time).

C) UTC (universal time coordinated).

Decompression leads to:

A) Hypoxia

B) Release of Nitrogen bubbles in the body
C) _ Instability of the aircraft

Decompression sickness is pronounced when the aircraft decompresses:
A) _ from MSL to 7000 feet

B) from 7000 feet to 35000 feet

C) from MSL to 15000 feet

Depth in vision is achieved through:
A) _ visual memory

B) _ peripheral vision

C) _ binocular vision

634

--- Page 324 ---

107.

108.

109.

110.

HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND LIMITATIONS

What is the role of RBCs in blood?
A) __ fight foreign bacteria bodies

B) clot blood

C) transport oxygen

Types of Hypoxia are:
A) _ stagnant hypoxia
B) anaemic hypoxia
C) _ both of these

A person who smokes one packet of cigarettes a day will reduce his capacity
to transport oxygen effectively by:

A) 0.5% to 2%

B) 5% to8%

C) 12% to 18%

Cold clammy skin is indicative of
A) hypoxia

B) decompression sickness

C) _ hyperventilatin

AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

pate [si4[s [el 7] elo] ol a] 2 [is | 14
jAtaltse ie ialc/alcis|s/a/e ia {el

(15 [16 | 17 | 18 [19 | 20 | 21 | 22 | 23] 24 | 25 | 26 | 27 | 28
Atc}atctalelel{ciciajelc ie |B

29 | 30 | 31 | 32 | 33 | 34 | 35 | 36 | 37 | 38] 30 | 40 | 41 | 42
pete }e}|elte}e}cicisaic/el]a |e [Bl

(43 [44 [45 | 46 | 47 | 48 | 49 | 50] 51] 52] 53 | 54 | 55 | 56
pc }atalie lic jalale|c|e|ela jc jal

57 | 58 | 59 | 60 | 61 | 62 | 63 | 64 | 65] 66] 67 | 68 | 69 | 70 |
etc }c}alele|ciclajs/ela {ec {Bl

71 | 72 | 73 | 74 | 75 | 76 | 77 | 78 | 79| 80 | 61 | 62 | 83 | 84 |

Ate tecl{atctalc|siejaic|es ja jc!

| 85 | 86 | 87 | 88 | 69 | 90 | 91 | 92 | 93] 94] 95 | 96 | 97 | 98 |
pate ic}alelec|c{slaiciela jc fal

[38 [ 400 [107 [102 [108 [104 | 105] 106 [707] 108] 109] TO
Bicl}alcis|jea|eic|ci}c|s|c |

636


--- Page 325 ---

124

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

QUESTIONS

1

Fit plan is to be filed in India in respect of:
A) _ All flights other than scheduled flights
B) All flights other than local flights

C) Only for scheduled flights

What does the abbreviation OIS mean?
A) Obstacle identification surface

B) Obstacle in surface

C) Obstacle identification slope

The minimum safest altitude that the aircraft can descend below the transition
altitude within 25 NMs of an aerodrome area is given by:

A) MORA
B) MOEA
C) MSA

Barotrauma of the middle ear is usually accompanied by:

A) Noises in the ear

B) Pain in the joints

C) Areduction in hearing ability and the feeling of increasing pressure

Pilot in command of an aircraft on precision approach cannot execute a landing
ates he has the runway visual references in contact before he can descend
elow:

A) MSA
B) MDH
C) DA

637

10.

11.

AIR REGULATIONS

Low visibility operations include:

A) _LVTO, Cat Il and Cat II! approaches.
B)  Catl, Il and Ill approaches.

C) Cat Il and Cat {Il approaches.

The registration mark shall consist of:

A) 1 to 3 letters and digits.

B) Acombination of letters and numbers.
C) Letters only, no digits are permitted.

Final reserve fuél, for a reciprocating engine aeroplane over destination

alternate, shall be:

(A) the amount of fuel required to fly for 45 minutes, under speed and altitude
conditions specified by the State of the Operator.

(B) the amount of fuel required to fly for 45 minutes and do aan approach and
missed approach.

(C) the amount of fuel required to fly for two hours, under speed and altitude
conditions specified by the Sta of the Operator.

Awhite dumbbell with a black bar spaced perpendicularly indicates:

A)  Allaircraft are required to land, takeoff and taxi on taxiways and runways only.

B) Are required to land and takeoff on runways only

C) Awhite dumbbell when displayed requires a/c to land and takeoff and taxi on
taxiways and runways only.

Alc on same level converging track has separation:

A) 15min
B) 10min
C) 5min

Aeronautical information circulars provide information that:

A) Timely knowledge of services, procedure or hazard which is essential to
personnel concerned with flight operations .

B) Does not qualify as a NOTAM or an inclusion in AIP, but relates to flight safety,
air navigation, administrative or legislative matters.

C) Temporary changes to the information contained in the AIP which are published
by means of special pages.

638

--- Page 326 ---

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

Night flying is logged for flying done between :
A) Sunset to sunrise

B) 30’ after sunset to 30’ before sunrise

C) 20’ before sunrise to 20’ after sunset

Apilot is used to land on wide runways only. When approaching a smaller and/
or narrower runway, the pilot may feel he is at:

A) Greater height than he actually is with the tendency to land short

B) Greater height and the impression of landing short

C) Lower than actual height with the tendency to overshoot

Identify touchdown zone lighting (TDZL).

A) Tworows of red transverse light bars disposed symmetrically about the runway
centerline.

B) Two rows of transverse light bars disposed symmetrically about the runway
centerline.

C) Flush centerline lights spaced at 50-foot intervals extending through the
threshold zone.

Runway centre line lights are:

A) Green
B) Blue
C) White

Emergency distance available for stopping aircraft is:

A) _ From starting point to end of clearway
B) From starting point to end of paved overrun.
C) From threshold plus 50’ to end of runway

Notams are distributed by means of :
A) Mail

B) Telecommunications

C) Telegrams

Transponder code for distress is:

A) 7700
B) 7600
C) 121.5

639

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.

AIR REGULATIONS

What type of flight is allowed in class A airspace:
A) !FRonly

B) IFRand VFR

C)  IFRand special VFR

An alc with seating capacity of 150, what is the number of flight attendants
required to be carried on the flight:

A) 2

B) 3

Cc) 4

Route designator for domestic routes is:
A) Alpha

B) Whiskey

C) Bravo

What lights would a pilot slightly above glide slope see on a PAPI?
A) 3green and 1 white

B) 3white and 1 red

C) 2red and 2 white

A pilot is used to land on small and narrow runways only. Approaching a larger
and wider runway can lead to:

A) Anearly or high “round out”

B) Asteeper than normal approach dropping low

C) A flatter than normal approach with the risk of “ducking under”

At runway and taxiway holding lines:

A) White dashes lie towards nearest runway.
B) Yellow continuous lines lie towards runway.
C) Yellow dashes lie towards nearest runway.

Identifier TDZL is :

A) — Green and white lights 75 mtr spacing.

B) White paired, flash lights at 150 mtr longitudinal.

C) White paired variable lights with 30 mtr longitudinal spacing.

640

--- Page 327 ---

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

For the regeneration of mental and physical functions the most important sleep
is:

A) REM

B) NREM

C) NREM-Stage 3

Hyperventilation is caused due to:

A) _ Decreased breathing rate

B) Emotional tension or anxiety

C) Excessive carbon mono-oxide in the blood

Abrupt head movement in a steep turn may cause:
A) _ Spatial disorientation

B) False horizon

C) Elevator illusion

Centrifugal force without visual aids can be interpreted by a pilot as:
A) Motion reversal

B) =‘ Turning

C) _ Rising and falling

Destination and information sings are:
A) _ Black letter in yellow background
B) Yellow letter in black background
C) White in back

Cockpit lights are:

A) _ Red light as they help in reading contours on maps at night
B) Bright lights

C) Dim white light

If a CPL holder is hospitalized for
invalid:

A) 7 days

B) 10days

C) 165days

day his medical becomes

Hypoxia:

A) _ Increases with altitude

B) Is normally experienced below 8000 feet
C) _ Is due to over breathing

641

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

41.

AIR REGULATIONS

A pilot doing a test flight can carry passengers:
A) Onpayment

B) Without payment

C) Cannot carry

If you see a white and flashing red light, ac is:
A) Alc flying away from you

B) Right to left

C) Left to right

Alc passing from left to right you will see:
A) Red light

B) Red and white light

C) Green light

Jet Airways flight is to take off from London to Bosnia. C of A will be as per the
rules of:

A) UK
B) India
C) Bosnia

One alc is tracking 030 degree reporting over a point at 0412 hrs other on 100
degree cannot pass this point before:

A) 0422
B) 0427
C) 0417

All International flights landing in India shall land ata :
A) Customs Airport only

B) = Any civil airport

C) Any airport provided they have nothing to declare.

ADC is not required if flying in:
A) 5nmand below 3000’
B) 3nmand below 1000’
C) 5nmand below 1000’ AGL

Aerobatics with in 2 nm of airport can not be done below:

A) 2000’
B) 6000’
C) 3000°

642

--- Page 328 ---

42.

43.

45.

46.

47.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

In order to get rid of excess nitrogen following scuba diving, subsequent flights
should be delayed:

A) 36 hours after any scuba diving

B) 3 hours after non decompression diving

C) 24hours

Advertisements can be painted on the exterior of an aircraft:
A) — Only for the company owning the aircraft.

B) Only if specifically permitted by DGCA.

C) Only for items not posing a health hazard.

Due to fog other a/c will appear to be:
A) Nearest than normal

B) Farther then normal

C) Will have no difference

‘Incubation period for relapsing fever is:

A) 6days

B) 7 days

C) 8days

Visibility required for VFR flight below 3000’ or 1000’ terrain clearance is:
A) 5km

B) 1.6km

C) 8km

If flying on a south-easterly heading at 2500 feet and you are asked to report
your heading and level, then you should reply with the message:

A) HEADING 215 AT 2500 FEET

B) HEADING 135 AT TWO THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED

C) 045AT2 POINT 5

643

48,

49.

50.

AIR REGULATIONS

The determination of the aerodrome minimum operating conditions must take
the following into account:

1. Equipment available for navigation

2. Dimensions and characteristics of the runways

3. Composition of the flight crew

4. Obstacles in the vicinity of approach and missed approach areas

5. Facilities for determining and communicating the weather conditions
The combination regrouping ail the correct statements is:

A) 2,4,5.
B) 1,2,4,5.
C) 1,2,3,4,5.

The minimum equipment list (MEL) gives the equipment which can be
inoperative when undertaking a flight and the additional procedures to be
observed accordingly. This list is prepared by:

A) The operator, and it is appended to the flight manual.

B) The operator, and it is inserted in the operations manual.

C) The manufacturer, and it is inserted in the operations manual.

The document that specifies the recommendations for instrument procedures
is called...

A) PANS OPS Doc 8168

B) The Air Navigation bulletin

C) The Convention of Chicago

644

--- Page 329 ---

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS
ANSWERS

ER ER ER EMER EE RARER
Blajte|ecicialelfalelajetela fe

.15 | 16 | 17 | 18 | 19 | 20 | 24 | 22 | 23] 24 | 25 | 26 | 27 | 28 |
cle |e la lalic}eielaic}c{ale lal

| 29 | 30 | 31 | 32 | 33 | 34 | 36 | 36 | 37 | 36] 30 | 40 | 41 | 42 |
pe tatetc talc}ajci{si/sjaltecl{e ic

43 | 44 | 45 [46 | 47 | 48 | 49 | 50 |
8 |e ic la |e ic [Bs lal

645

AIR REGULATIONS

2

Inst. Chart procedures are given in:

A) AIP
B) NOTAMS
C) AIRAC

Inst. Charts carried in aircraft are contained in:
A) Operation Manual

B) Aircraft Manual

C) Route guides

Danger areas are given in:

A) AIRAC

B) AIC

Cc) AIP

To know the current watch hours at an aerodrome, pilot should refer to:
A) NOTAMs

B) AIP

Cc) AIC

Vertical separation applicable to non-RVSM aircraft operating in RVSM
airspaces is:

A) 500’
B) 1000’
C) 2000

Weather below minima implies that:

A) RVR’ Visibility and weather below minima specified by the operator
B) Weather below V MC

C) RVR/VIS and weather below minima specified by ICAO

Two digits in black over yellow back ground hanging from the tower indicates:
A) _ Time in UTC (hrs)

B) Runway in use

C) Location of ATS reporting point

646

--- Page 330 ---

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

SAMPLE.QUESTION PAPERS

Circling minima’s are:

A) _ Higher than precision app minimas
B) Lower than precision app minimas
C) Same as precision app minimas

ARP is at the:

A) Geometric centre of an aerodrome
B) Highest elevation at an aerodrome
C) Designated point at the aerodrome.

SIDS are published in:

A) AIRAC
B) NOTAMs
Cc) AIP

White flashes from tower to aircraft in flight means:
A) _ Return to this aerodrome and proceed to apron
B) Land at this aerodrome and proceed to apron.

C) Land after green signal from Tower.

OCA is determined after taking into account margin for:
A) _ Terrain Clearance

B) Pilot Error

C) Operational Considerations

RVR/DH for cat I ILS ops is:
A) 550m/60

B) 300m/30m

C)  350m/30m

Green Light on an aircraft is visible if seen from the front:
A) At an arc of 110° to the port side

B) Atanarc of 110° to the starboard side

C)  Atan arc of 140° to the starboard side

Position reports to be given by an aircraft, if no route is being followed will be
at an interval of:

A) 30mins

B) 60mins

C) First report after 30 mins and subsequent reports after 60 mins

647

16.

17.

18,

19.

20.

21.

22.

AIR REGULATIONS

Oxygen is carried on board for all crew members and passengers when at
atmospheric pressure will be less than:

A) 620hPa
B) 700hPa
C) 376hPa

A twin engine p-i-c has decided to divert due to failure of one engine. It will be:
A) _ Uncertainty phase

B) Alert phase

C) Distress phase

An IFR flight will maintain a minimum altitude of:

A) 2000’ above highest obstacle with in 8 kms of aircraft position in mountainous
areas

B) BothA) and C) are correct

C) 1000’ above highest obstacle with in 600m of aircraft position in mountainous
areas.

Prisoners can be carried on board with the permission of:
A) Police commissioner

B) DGCA

C) DM

If cornea is curved more than normal, the person suffers from:
A) Myopia

B) _Presbiopia

C) —Hypermetropia

According to ICAO Annex 8, a certificate of airworthiness shall be renewed or
shall remain valid subject to the:

A) Laws of the state of registry and operation

B) Laws of the state in which is operated

C) Laws of the state of registry

Flight Information Region (FIR) is an airspace within which the following
services are provided: -

A) _ Flight Information Service and Alerting Service

B) Flight Information Service and Advisory Service

C) Flight Information Service, Alerting Service and Advisory Service

648

--- Page 331 ---

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

VER flights are not permitted:
A) Above FL 100

B) Above FL150

C) Above FL 50

Personnel are required to preserve their log books for a period of --- years after
the date of last entry:

A) 2years
B) 5 years
C) 1year

Movement area of an aerodrome constitutes the following:
A) Area including runways / taxiways excluding apron

B) Area excluding taxiways but including runways and apron
C) Area including runways / taxiways / aprons

PIC of an aeroplane on Scheduled operations can fly for a maximum number of
hours in a period of consecutive days:

A) 125 hours

B) 100 hours

C) 80 percent of time as co-pilot

Validity of ATPL medical and licence is:
A) 6months and 5 years

B) 6 months and 2 years

C) 12 months and 5 years

Cabin crew required for a passenger plane with 83 seating capacity is:

A) 1
B) 2
Cc) 3

The common illusion created by linear acceleration or deceleration is:

A) _Abanking sensation due to disturbances in the fluid circulation in the inner ear
B) Acombined pitch up and banking sensations

C)  Apitch up feeling when the aircraft accelerates

649

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

AIR REGULATIONS

Aircraft on flight gets an advisory and flight information service with in an FIR,
it is provided by:

A) Fic ‘

B) Approach control office

C) Area control center

Navigation lights of an aeroplane cover the following sectors:
A) Red on starboard, green on port 110 deg each
B) Green on starboard, red on port 110 deg each
C) Redon starboard, green on port 140 deg each

EDTO is applicable to:

A) _ Twin engine operations.

B) Aeroplane with two or more turbine engines.

C) Aeroplane with more than two reciprocating engines.

Control area is:

A) Controlled airspace extending upwards from a specified limit above the earth

B) Controlled airspace extending upwards from surface of the earth to a specified
limit

C)  BothAand B above

When refueling operations are in progress, unauthorized persons are prohibited
within:

A) 15mtrs
B) 30nitrs
C) 43 mtrs

Linear accelerations when flying straight and level in IMC may give the illusion
of:

A) Descending

B) = Spinning

C) Climbing

Decompression sickness causes:
A) Lack of CO, in blood

B) Lack of O, in blood.

C) _N, bubbles in tissues

650

--- Page 332 ---

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

Under normal circumstances, which gas will diffuse from the blood to. the
alveoli:

A) Carbon monoxide

B) Carbon dioxide

C) Oxygen

An aircraft incident and accident is to be reported within:
A) _ Incident 24 hrs, accident 24 hours
B) __ Incident 24 hrs, accident 48 hours
C) _ Incident 24 hrs, accident 12 hours

Emergency check list is to be carried by:
A) Scheduled flights

B) Non- scheduled operators

C) All aircraft

Which type of service is provided in Class F airspace?
A) _ Air traffic control service

B) Air traffic advisory service and FIS

C) Air traffic advisory service

As a PIC you find yourself over a prohibited area, you will:
A) _ Signal urgency and land at the nearest aerodrome

B) Signal distress and land at nearest aerodrome

C) As ‘B’ and land at aerodrome outside the prohibited area

The repeated switching on and off of the landing lights indicate:

A) urgency
B) distress
C)  panpan
A pressurized flight shall:

A) Carry oxygen for all crew members

B) Carry oxygen for all crew members and passengers

C) Carry oxygen for all crew members and passengers, in the event of loss of
pressurization, pressure in the compartment would be less than 700 mb

651

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

AIR REGULATIONS

General information of purely explanatory or advisory nature are promulgated
through:

A) CAR
B) AIP
Cc) AIC

Succession of command is given by:
A) _ The operator to pilots by a circular
B) DGCA

C) Central Government

Doc 4444 relates to:
A) _ Flight level tables
B) Position reports
C) All above

What does the term EXPECTED APPROACH TIME mean:
A) The time at which an arriving aircraft expects to arrive over the appropriate
designated navigation aid serving the destination aerodrome.

B) The holding time over the radio facility from which the instrument approach
procedure for a landing will be initiated.

C) The time at which ATC expects that an arriving aircraft, following a delay, will
leave the holding point to complete its approach for a landing.

When calculating the length of the runway available (TODA):
A) _ The stopway has to be taken into account.

B) The clearway has to be taken into account.

C) The runway slope has to be taken into account.

A circling approach is:

A) _ Avisual flight manoeuvre keeping the runway in sight
B)  Acontact flight manoeuvre

C) Avisual manoeuvre to be conducted only in IMC

or aircraft flying over the high seas, which rules shall be in force?

A) The rules established by the state of the operator of the aircraft

B) The rules established under the Convention of international civil aviation
C) The rules established by the state(s) adjacent to the high seas over flown

652

--- Page 333 ---

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

ANSWERS

15 | 16 | 17 | 18 | 19 | 20 | 21 | 22 | 23] 24 | 26 | 26 | 27 | 28]
je |e |e iets falcilals{slcle lc [al

EES ESE ESSE Gd
feyayslelajtale|cisjaic|s|cja

143 | 44 | 45 [46 [47 [48 | 49 | 50 |
je i|cla le ic [es fale

653

AIR REGULATIONS

When “Secondary Radar” is used, an aircraft may be identified by one of the

following procedures:

A) Observation of compliance with an instruction to operate transponder from
“ON” to“STBY” and back to “ON”

B) To request pilot to set transponder on position “ON”..

C) To request pilot to set transponder on position “OFF”

No of runway threshold stripes for a runway width of 23 meters is:

A) 4
B) 5
Cc) 6
Pair of landing stripes for a runway LDA of 1500 meters is:
A) 2
B) 3
Cc) 4

Filed minima 500m, RVR beginning 800m, RVR mid 300m. Aerodrome is:
A) Below minima

B) At par with minima

C) Above minima

Flight manual is a manual associated with:
A) COA

B) ICAO Standards

C) DGCACARs

Number of cabin crew is required according to:

A) No. of passengers excluding crew members

B) _No. of persons on board including crew members
C) No. of seats

Track separation is:
A) Longitudinal
B) Lateral

C) Composite

654

--- Page 334 ---

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

Geographical separation is:
A) Longitudinal

B) Lateral

C) Composite

Alert phase is:

A) _ Aircraft is about to force land in a river

B) Aircraft is intercepted

C) Apprehension exists as to the safety of the ship and its occupants.

Appropriate way to cross a route.

A) Along the traffic flow at 45 degrees

B) 90 degrees to the route

C) Against the flow of traffic keeping a sharp lookout

Among the factors which affect night vision are:

A) Age, cabin altitudes above 8000 ft, smoking and alcohol.

B) Age, cabin altitudes above 8000 ft, smoking, alcohol and lack of vitamin D.
C) Age, cabin altitudes above 8000 ft, smoking, alcohol and lack of vitamin C.

Semi-circular system sectors are.

A) From 001° to 180° and 181° to 360°
B) From 000° 179° and 180° to 359°
C) From 090° to 260° and 270° to 089°

Aerodrome Traffic Zone for VFR flights is to be considered, if ATZ is not notified
is:

A) With in 5 NM of ARP up to 3000 feet.

B) With in 25 NM of ARP up to 10,000 feet. ‘’

C) With in 10 NM of ARP up to 5000 feet.

identify taxi leadoff lights associated with the centerline lighting system:

A) Alternate green and yellow lights curving from the centerline of the runway to
the entry of the apron

B) Alternate green and yellow lights curving from the centerline of the runway to
the edge of the taxiway

C) Alternate green and yellow lights curving from the centerline of the runway to
the centerline of the taxiway

655

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

AIR REGULATIONS

The following are appropriate when faced with symptoms of decompression

sickness:

1. Climb to higher level

2. Descent to the higher of 10000 ft or MSA and land as soon as possible

3. Breathe 100% oxygen

4. Get medical advice about recompression after landing

The combination of correct statements is:

A) 1,4

B) 1,2,3
2,3,4

The circulation system, among other things, allows for:

1. Transportation of oxygen and carbon dioxide

2.‘ Transportation of information by chemical substances

A) 1 and 2 are correct

B) 1s correct, 2 wrong

C) _ both are wrong

Which of the following requirements should be met when planning a flight with

icing conditions:

A) _ The flight should be planned so that a change of cruising level can be initiated
rapidly

B) The aircraft shall before flight sprayed with anti-icing fluid

C) The aircraft shall be equipped with approved ice-protection systems

Red square with one yellow diagonal.

A) Landings are prohibited and that the prohibition is liable to be prolonged.
B) Special precautions must be observed in approaching to land or in landing.
C) Return to starting point on the aerodrome.

Notams series A are:

A) _ International notams for changes/ unserviceability likely to last more than 2 hrs.
B) Domestic notams for air routes

C) International notams for changes/ unserviceability likely to last less than 2 hrs.

656

--- Page 335 ---

20.

21.

22.

23.

25.

26.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

The RCP concept characterizes the performance required for:
A) Computer capabilities that support ATM functions with reference to latest

technology.

B) Command capabilities that support ATM functions with reference to satellite
based technology

C) Communication capabilities that support ATM functions without reference to
any specific technology .

If an aerodrome minima is not established for IFR/VFR operations the minima
to be applied will be laid down by:

A) DGCA

B) AAI

C) Operator

OCA:

A) _ Is specified to facilitate safe holding heights

B) Used in establishing compliance with appropriate obstacle clearance criteri A)
C) Meets obstructions clearance criteria for take offs

Damage to eardrums or ossicles (middle ear bones) leads to:
A) Conductive hearing loss

B) Disorientation

C) Permanent loss of hearing dizziness

ARIWS consists of a surveillance system:
A) To alert ATC about runway incursions in real time basis
B) Toalert ATC and flight crew about runway incursions in a timely manner.

C) To generate alerts independent from ATC directly to the flight crew and vehicle
operators about runway incursions on real time basis.

Amendment to aircraft rules 1937 is given in:

A) AIP

B) AIC

C) AIRAC

Deviations from ICAO procedures are published in:
A) AIC

B) AIRAC

Cc) AIP

657

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

AIR REGULATIONS

Precision approach (PA) procedure is an instrument approach procedure:

A) _ based on using both lateral and vertical navigation guidance systems designed
for conventional 3D all weather approaches.

B) based on navigation systems (ILS, MLS,GLS and SBAS Cat I) designed for 3D
instrument approach operations Type A or B.

C) based on PBN ( GBAS and SBAS) designed for 3D instrument approach
operations Type A, B or C.

Abrupt head movements in IMC operations may cause:
A) _ Disorientation

B) False horizon

C) Optical illusion

Flight Engg. Is carried on board:
A) If demanded by C of A

B) If operator feels so

C) If P-I-C desires so

A departing aircraft carrying sick or injured persons will get priority over:
A) Anaircraft carrying VVIP

B) Military fighter flights

C) Anaircraft engaged in a live scramble

UB67DFC stands for:

A) _ The nationality mark for unmanned aircraft registered in India
B) International route in Upper airspace class D, F and C

C) Way point in Upper airspace

Instrument flying time means:

A) _ Flying simulator

B) ‘Flying in IMC

C) Flying a/c with sole reference to instruments

Outside controlled airspace above 3000’AMSL fly on:

A) 1013.2
B) QFE
C) QNH

658

--- Page 336 ---

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS
ATPL who is 28 years old, medical is valid for:
A) 2yrs
B) tyr
C) 6months

ATC services are provided to IFR flights and traffic information to VER flights
as far as practical provided in class airspace:

A) B
B) E
Cc) OD

Navigation light are to be displayed by all aircraft in flight:
A) From sunset to sunrise

B) From 30 mins after sunset till 30 mins before sunrise

C)  Atalltime

IFR flight in VMC, weather changes to IMC:

A) Fly VMC and land at nearest convenient aerodrome.
B) _ Fly according to flight plan

C) Change to VFR plan

Person is killed on runway while landing after being hit by the wing of an
aircraft. It is an:

A) Accident

B) Incident

C) Accident only if it was due to pilots fault

Aerodrome category for rescue and fire fighting is determined based on:
A) Maximum certified All Up Weight of aircraft.

B) Aeroplane over ail length and maximum fuselage width.

C) Seating capacity of the aeroplane.

Series of red and green projection fired at an interval of 10 secs means:
A) Keep away from danger area

B) Exercise caution while landing

C) Do not land for the time being

Straight out departure is:
A)  10degree
B) 15 degree

C) 30 degree

659

42.

44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

AIR REGULATIONS

Aerodromes signs should be in the following configuration:

A) mandatory instruction signs; black background with red inscriptions.

B) _ Information signs; yellow or black background with black or yellow inscriptions
C) mandatory instruction signs; red background with black inscriptions.

If there is a minor damage to aircraft on a ferry flight, passengers:
A) Cannot be carried

B) Can be carried

C) Can be carried with the permission of operator

An aircraft shall display, if so equipped, an anti-collision light:

A) Outside the daylight-period in flight, but not on the ground when it is being
towed;

B) While taxing, but not when it is being towed;

C) On the ground when the engines are running

The transition level:

A) _ shall be the lowest available flight level above the transition altitude that has
been established

B) __ shall be the highest available flight level below the transition altitude that has
been established

C) is calculated and decided by the commander

Alc A at F390 reports at a point at 0210 wants to descend to F330, a/c B at F 360
estimates to reach the same reporting point at 0300. Before what time the first
alc should reach F330? ,

A) 0235
B) 0250
C) 0225

Which word or phrase shall be used in order to repeat for clarity or emphasis?
A) Read back.

B) | say again.

C) Confirm.

Who is responsible for approving methods of calculating minimum flight
altitudes?

A) The DGCA.

B) The ICAO Council.

C) The State of the Operator.

660

--- Page 337 ---

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

49. The term used to describe the visual phase of flight after completing an
instrument approach, to bring an aircraft into position for landing on runway
which is not suitably located for straight-in approach, is:

A) Aerodrome traffic pattern
B) Visual manoeuvring (circling)
C) Visual approach

50. Where there is an amendment to an International Standard a State must give
notice to:
A) The ICAO Council within 60 days of the adoption of the amendment
B) The ICAO Assembly within 30 days of the adoption of the amendment
C) The ICAO Assembly within 60 days of the adoption of the amendment

661

AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

Pat? [s+ ts [et] sje{ ol am] 2 | 43 | 4
Ate tec{[efaleclel{eai[c{sj/alela |e!

[15 [16 [17 [18 [19 | 20 | 24 | 22 | 23] 24 | 25 | 26 | 27 | 28 |
pctatc|efajclajejajc}si{c|s iat

[ 20 | 30 | 31 | 32 | 33 | 34 | 36 | 36 | 37 | 38] 30 | 40 | 41 | 42 |
pAvatatc{alelelalejajs] als |B

43 [44 [45 [46 [47 | 48 | 49 | 50
pate |a lc |e jc lela

662

--- Page 338 ---

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

4

VT-AXC owned by a private citizen is on a flight to Sri Lanka from Chennai on
sight seeing tour. The aircraft’s required to carry. among other things.
A) Manifest and detailed declarations of the cargo.

B) Pilots Log Book

C) MEL

Vertical separation in CVSM airspaces above FL 290 is:

A) 1000’

B) 2000’

C) 4000’

Altitude in transition layer is maintained by setting altimeter to.
A) QFE

B) 1013.2

C) QNH

In relation to hypoxia, which of the following paraphrase(s) is (are) correct?

A) _ This is a physical condition caused by a lack of oxygen saturation in the blood
while hyperventilating

B) This is a condition of lacking oxygen in the brain causing the circulatory system
to compensate by decreasing the heart rate

C) This is a physical condition caused by a lack of oxygen to meet the needs
of the body tissues, leading to mental and muscular disturbances, causing
impaired thinking, poor judgment and slow reactions

OCA is associated with:

(A) Oceanic Clearance Altitude, minimum altitude to fly over occeans
(B) Minimum altitude to fly above Transition level.

(C) Altitude calculated to ensure obstacle/terrain clearance

Before arrival in India a health report is to be sent.
A) Before take off

B) 7 days prior to arrival

C) 2 hours before arrival

663

10.

11.

12.

13.

AIR REGULATIONS

If your aircraft is carrying cargo for remuneration, it will be known as a:
A) Private aircraft

B) Aerial work aircraft

C) Public transport aircraft

A horizontal yellow diagonal on a red square panel indicates.
A) Special precautions to be take when approaching to land.
B) Landing areas is unserviceable

C) Check runway in use

When radio contact.is lost, an IFR flight in VMC should.

A) Continue in VMC and land at nearest suitable aerodrome
B) Continue as per current flight plan

C) _ Divert to alternate airfield

Minimum vertical distance from cloud for VFR flight within controlled space is.

A) 1000 ft
B) 500ft
C) 1000m

IFR flight within controlled airspace shall immediately report any deviations
from flight plan resulting in;

A) _ Variation of TAS by 10 knots.

B) Change in ETA over reporting point by more than 2 minutes

C) All above are correct

ICAO document dealing with Aerodromes is:

A) Doc 8168
B) Annex 7
C) Annex 14

An airplane is planning a flight that will require a technical landing in a
neighboring state. Which freedom of the air will be exercised?

A) 2nd freedom

B) 3rd freedom

C) 4th freedom

664

--- Page 339 ---

14,

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

A situation wherein apprehension exists as to the safety of an aircraft and its
occupants is;

A) — Uncertainty (INCERFA)

B) Distress phase (DISTRESFA)

C) Alert Phose (ALERFA)

At holding point ATC transmits “cleared for immediate take off’, what does it
mean?

A) _ Take off immediately after completing all checks on runway.

B) Inform ATC when you are ready to take off with out waiting on runway.

C) Taxi immediately to runway and commence take off with out stop.

Hyperventilation is caused due to lack of in blood system:

A) — Carbon Dioxide

B) Oxygen

Cc) co

Track separation is also known as separation:
A) Vertical

B) Lateral

C) Longitudinal

An aircraft manoeuvering in an airport’s circuit receives a series of red flashes
from the control tower. This signifies that the aircraft must:

A) _ not land because the airport is not available for landing

B) return to land and that clearance to land will be communicated in due course
C) not land for the moment regardless of previous instructions

Anti-collision lights on an aircraft must be switched on:

A) Between SS and SR or any other period specified by the appropriate authority
B) As soon as engines are running

C) By all aircraft operating on the movement area

All aircraft transiting from a foreign FIR to an Indian FIR should inform ATS
units responsible for providing FIS at least:

A) 30 minutes prior to entry

B) 20 minutes prior to entry

C) 10 minutes before entry

665

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

AIR REGULATIONS

Fit plan is prepared by:

A) Choosing routes as listed in AIP

B) Taking shortest distance to the destination
C) Taking any arbitrary points on route

For safety reasons, a person should remain away from a jet engine by at least:

A) 100’
B) 200’
C) 300°

Identify runway remaining lighting on centre line lighting systems;

A) Amber lights from 3000 ft to 1000 ft, then alternate red and white lights to the
end.

B) Alternate red and white from 3000 ft to 1000 ft, then red lights to the end.

C) Alternate red and white lights from 3000 ft to the end of the runway.

Identify touchdown zone lighting (TDZL):
A) Two rows of transverse light bars disposed symmetrically about the runway
centre line.

B) _ Flashing centre line lights spaced at 50 ft intervals extending through the touch
down zone.

C) Alternate white and green centre line lights extending from 75 ft from the
threshold through the touch down zone.

When instructed by ATC to “hold short of a runway (ILS critical area etc.)” the
pilot should stop:

A) With the nose gear on the hold line.

B) So that no part of the aircraft extends beyond the hold line.

C) So that the flight deck area of the aircraft is even with the hold line.

Airport information signs, used to provide destination or information, have:
A) _ Yellow inscriptions on a black background.
B) White inscriptions on a black background.
C) Black inscriptions on a yellow background.

666

--- Page 340 ---

27.

28.

29.

30.

31,

32,

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

An aircraft which is being subjected to unlawful interference (‘hijacked’) and is

forced to divert from the cleared track or cruising level without being able to

communicate with ATS shall try to:

A) Declare an emergency

B) As soon as possible commence emergency descent in order minimize the
difference between cabin pressure and outside pressure.

C) Continue at an altitude that differs from the semicircular rule with 1000 feet
when above FL 290 and 500 feet when lower than FL 290..

Action required for rapid decompression recovery is:

A) Only the prompt supply of oxygen is necessary

B) Take prompt supply of oxygen, descend to the lowest possible level and land
as soon as possible

C) Only medical treatment is of use

Damage to Tympanic membrane may be caused due to:

A) _ Flying with a severe cold due to changes in air pressure and blocked eustachian
tubes resulting from the cold.

B) Pain in the joints

C) Lack of oxygen to meet the needs of the body tissues

One pilot will be designated as PIC of a public transport aircraft for each flight
by:

A) _ The operator

B) DGCA

C) Flying contract unit

Enroute altitude will be determined for each stage of the route by taking 1000 ft
terrain clearance within:

A) 10nm
B) 10km
C) 20nm

Vicinity of the aerodrome for a VFR /IFR flight is:

A) 5miles around up to 3000 ft AGL

B) 25 miles around

C) Asin “A” above and instrument holding and approach procedure paths

667

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

AIR REGULATIONS

Cruising level available on a magnetic track of 300° are:
A) 115, 135, 155, 175
B) 110, 130, 150, 160,
C) 125, 145, 165, 185

In a standard holding pattern turns are made:

A) _ to the right

B) ina direction depending on the entry;

C) ina direction depending on the wind direction.

The privileges of a license can be exercised by a pilot involved in an incident
after:

A) _ Heis cleared by the medical authority

B)  Heis cleared by the DGCA

C) He is cleared by the ATS authority

An Air India aircraft is on a dry lease to I.A.F. for military use. It will be known
as a:

A) — Civil aircraft

B) Military aircraft

C) International flight

In a category D airspace, ATC will provide separation between:

A) FR flights and provides information on VFR flights and traffic avoidance on
request to IFR flights and traffic information to VFR flights

B) __IFR flights and IFR flights

C) _IFR flights and IFR/VFR flights and VFR/VFR flights

Track separation ensures:

A) _ Vertical separation between aircraft.
B) Time separation between aircraft.
C) Lateral separation between aircraft.

VER flights in class ‘E’ airspace are provided with?
A) _ Nil separation

B) Horizontal separation

C) Lateral separation

668

--- Page 341 ---

40.

4.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

Aircraft takes off from a runway of 45 meter width and makes an approach on
a 25 meter wide runway, the pilot may feel at:

A) Greater height and the impression of landing short

B) Greater height than he actually is with the tendency to land short

C)  Ower than actual height with the tendency to overshoot

Aircraft flying in class ‘D’ airspace at 9000’ will have following speed limit?
A) No speed limit

B) 250kts TAS

C) 250 kts IAS

Your aircraft is intercepted by a military aircraft. The signals given by this
aircraft conflict with ATC instructions. You should:

A) _ follow ATC instructions

B) _ select code A7500 on your transponder

C) _ follow the instructions of the intercepting aircraft

No domestic flight carrying passengers is permitted to fly with in
nautical miles of international border.

A) 15km.
B) 15nm
C) 10nm

Unless otherwise indicated, the missed approach procedures published on the
IAC charts are based on a minimum climb gradient of:

A) 25%
B) 3%
C) 5%

CO poisoning symptoms:
A) _ Tightening of forehead.
B) Loss of muscular power.

C) Bends

Tirupati aerodrome designator is?
A) VATP

B) VETP

C) VOTP

669

47.

48.

49,

50.

AIR REGULATIONS

EDTO stands for:

A) Extended Diversion Time Operations (EDTO)
B) Expected Diversion Time Overhead (EDTO)
C) Expected Direction of Take Off (EDTO)

When reporting a frequency the use of the word DECIMAL can be omitted:
A) Never.

B) When there is no likelihood of confusion.

C) By the ground station only.

Which is the most complete list of documents that are to be carried on each

flight:

A) Certificate of airworthiness, AOP, aircraft radio license, maintenance records
and maintenance program.

B) Certificate of registration, certificate of airworthiness, AOP, aircraft radio
license, crew licences.

C) Certificate of registration, aircrew log books and certificate of airworthiness.

The Transition Level:

A) Is calculated and declared for an approach by the Pilot-in command

B) Is published for the aerodrome in the Section ENR of the AIP

C) Shall be the lowest flight level available for use above the transition altitude.

670

--- Page 342 ---

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

ANSWERS

ER ER ER EMER ER RARER
ATBicicic}el{clafajaicitcla cl

BN ca Oe
re[atefale{c{alslelajs|[cic |e

| 29 | 30_| 34 | 32 | 33 | 34 | 35 | 36 | 37 | 38 | 39 | 40 | 41 | 42 |
ATA TBic|ic}alsaisia|ci}alsie {ec

(43 [44 | 45 [46 [47 [48 | 49 | 50 |
Bia ls ic ja ja {slic

671

AIR REGULATIONS

AP.-i-C is:

A) _ The pilot who is competent to fly the aeroplane under all weather conditions.

B) The Pilot who for the time being is in charge of the controls of the aeroplane.

C) Apilot who is responsible for the operation and safety of the aeroplane during
flight time.

Why PANS OPS are a separate document from the Annexes?
A) The procedures are outside of the scope of the SARPS.

B) The procedures are too complicated for pilots to understand.
C) The document is not relevant to air crew.

ARIWS stands for:

A) Automatic Runway Instrumented Weather Services.
B) Autonomous Runway Incursion Warning System.
C) Airborne Runway Instrument Warning System.

A Control Area is:

A) defined area of airspace in which all controlled flights are provided with an Air
Traffic Service.

B) The confluence of airways adjacent to one or more aerodromes where ATC is
provided to all air traffic.

C) Aportion of airspace (between defined altitudes) where it has been determined
that an ATC service will be provided to all IFR traffic and some VFR traffic.

The document ‘Procedures for Air Navigation Services — Air Traffic Management’
(PANS-ATM) is also commonly known by its ICAO document number. What is
the document number?

A) Doc 8168
B) Doc 4444
C) Doc 7333

Who is responsible for the issuing of clearance to achieve the safe and
expeditious flow of a traffic to aircraft on the maneuvering area and to prevent
collisions between aircraft and obstructions on the movement area?

A) | The aerodrome Controller

B) The approach Controller

C) The Ground Controller

672

--- Page 343 ---

10.

11.

12.

13.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

What Annex to the Chicago Convention covers ‘Facilitation’?

A)  Annex6
B) Annex 9
C) Annex 15
What is ICAO?

A) An organization only permitted to make recommendations which are not
binding on member states.

B) Anorganization of civil aviation operators, limited to 33 members.

C)  Aspecialized agency related to the United Nations.

Two aircraft are departing from a reporting point defined by an NDB. What is
the minimum track separation required before one aircraft would be permitted
to climb/descend through the other aircraft’s level?

A) 30° and a distance of 15 nm or more.

B) 15° and a distance of 15 km or more.

C) 30° and a distance of 15 km or more.

What does the structure of ICAO consists of?

A) AnAssembly, Council, Secretariat, committees and commissions.

B) ACouncil; a Secretariat and committees and commissions.

C) Aruling council of a small number of permanent states (like the UN security
council) with committees and commissions reporting to the Council.

Trip fuel, which shall be the amount of fuel required to enable the aeroplane to

fly:

(A) _ from take-off, until landing at the destination aerodrome.

(B) from take-off or the point of in-flight re-planning, until landing at the destination
aerodrome.

(C) from take-off , until landing at the destination aerodrome, including taxi fuel.

Factors affecting night vision are:

A) Alcohol, smoking, cabin altitude above 8000’ and age.

B) Alcohol, smoking, cabin altitude above 5000’ and instrument lights.
C) Alcohol, smoking, age and lack of vitamin D.

When do PANS-ATM procedures absolve pilots from the responsibility for
terrain avoidance?

A) Never

B) | When under radar vectoring.

C) During take off and landing.

673

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

AIR REGULATIONS

Vitamins are essential for good night vision, therefore:
A) _ Pilots should take excess intake of vitamin A to improve night vision significantly.

B) Pilots should take balanced diet containing sufficient vitamin A)

C) Vitamin A deficiency does not matter, so long the pilot has adequate vitamin D
intake.

What is the relevance of the OCH for a precision approach?

A) _ It is the MDH/if the glide path information is lost.

B) _ It is the lowest height at which a missed approach must be initiated.

C) _ Itis the height at which an aircraft correctly positioned on the glide must obtain
the visual minima to land.

When converging at approximately the same altitude :
A) _ balloons shall give way to hang gliders

B) aeroplanes towing gliders shall give way to balloons
C) _ balloons shall give way to gliders.

Where traffic is flying in an established traffic pattern at an aerodrome where
ATC is provided (a controlled aerodrome), who is responsible for collision
avoidance?

A) _ It depends upon the class of airspace.

B) The aerodrome controller.

C) The pilots of the aeroplanes.

Normal AOM RVR is 300m, Restricted AOM shall be:
A) 700M

(B) 500M

(C) 200M.

Enroute fit levels are on:

A) QNE

B) QNH

C) QFE

What is the International Aeronautical VHF Distress and Calling frequency?
A) 121.500MHz
B)  123.450MHZ
C) 406.000MHz

674

--- Page 344 ---

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

You are flying in VMC and you suffer a communications failure. What are you
required to do

A) Land immediately.

B) Continue to fly in VMC and land at the nearest suitable aerodrome.

C) Turn round and head back to the aerodrome of departure.

If you are flying in IMC and you suffer a communications failure, which of the

following is a correct course of action?

A) Proceed in accordance with the flight plan as filed.

B) Proceed in accordance with the current flight plan (the flight plan as cleared by
ATC and any re-clearance subsequently obtained).

C) Turn around and go home.

What are the objectives of an ATC clearance?

A) To see how accurately the pilot can read the clearance back and test if he can
spot errors.

B) To give route and altitude specific information when different from that flight
planned.

C) Collision avoidance and air traffic flow management.

Capillaries:

A) _ Facilitate oxygen/carbon dioxide exchange.
B) Are the largest vessels carrying blood.

C) Control heart beats.

An instrument approach has:
A) Three segments

B) Five segments

C) Six segments

What is the principle objective of a rescue and fire fighting service?
A) To minimize the damage caused by fire.

B) To extinguish any with minimum delay.

C)  Tosave lives.

Ascending order of stress is:

A) Family death, divorce, marriage, mortgage.
B) Mortgage, marriage, family death, divorce.
C) Mortgage, marriage, divorce, family death.

675

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

AIR REGULATIONS

Who is responsible for the issue of a certificate of airworthiness?
A) ICAO

B) The DGCA

C) The authority of State of Registration.

While facing turbulent weather, a pilot reduces speed to:
A) _ Avoid stalling.

B) Achieve better maneuorobility.

C) Avoid structural damage.

Doc 4444 relates to:
A) _ Flight level tables.
B) Position reports.
C) All above.

Circadian Circle represents:

A) _ our level of alertness throughout the day.

B) — our level of competence to undertake a challenging job.

C) our level of incompetence after the peak is achieved in a career.

Some one is calling you using a language which you cannot understand. You
will indicate this by transmitting:

A) Cannot comply

B) Unable to comply

C) Cannot

An aircraft electing to change the conduct of its flight from IFR to VFR shall,
if a flight plan was submitted, notify the appropriate ATS unit specifically by
transmitting:

A) Cancelling my IFR flight plan.
B) Cancelling my IFR flight.
C) Cancelling my IFR plan.

676

--- Page 345 ---

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

An aircraft is flying under Instrument Flight Rules in an area where the visibility
is unlimited and the sky Is clear, when it totally loses radio communications.
The procedure to be foliowed is:

A) _ land on the closest appropriate aerodrome, then advise Air Traffic Services of

landing.

B) continue flight onto destination, complying with last received clearances then
with filed flight plan.

C) descend to En-route Minimum Safe Altitude and join closest airfield open to
IFR operations.

QNH at Mumbai is 1009. TL at Mumbai will be:

A) FL45
B) FLS50
C) FL55

To which aircraft is a flight information service (FIS) provided?

A) Only aircraft in receipt of ATC.

B) All controlled flight from engine start to final shut gown.

C) Al aircraft in receipt of an ATC service or known to ATC which are likely to be
affected by the information.

What type of airspace is normally established at the confluence of ATS routes
in the vicinity of one or more major aerodromes?

A) _ Terminal Control Area (TMA).

B) Control Zone (CTR).

C) Special Rules Area (SRA).

Hypoxic hypoxia is

A) _ The result of low oxygen levels in the bloodstream.

B) The result of low hemoglobin.

C)  Aninability of the cells of the body to use the oxygen available.

You see yellow runway edge lights, what does this mean?

A) You have run into the stop way.

B) They have run out of the normal colour bulbs.

C) You are within 600m of the end of the runway or have less then one third of the
runway remaining.

677

40.

41.

42.

43.

45.

AIR REGULATIONS

What is the Annex of the Chicago Convention that covers SAR?

A) Annex 14
B) Annex 12
C) Annex 16

The minimum safest altitude that the aircraft can descent below the transition
altitude within 25 NMs of an aerodrome area is given by:

A) MSA
B) MOEA
C) MORA

According to ICAO Annex 8, a certificate of airworthiness shall be renewed or
shall remain valid subject to the:

A) _ Laws of the state of registry and operation.

B) Laws of the state in which is operation.

C) Laws of the state of registry.

Presbyopia is also known as:
A) Short sightedness

B) Cross sightedness

C) Long sightedness

if you are intercepted by a military aircraft over foreign territory, on what
frequency should you attempt to speak to the military pilot?

A)  TheATC frequency in use.

B)  121.500MHz (the VHF distress and calling frequency).

C) Nospecific frequency. Try the lot until get contact.

You are carrying out an instrument approach to land at Mumbai International.

You are IMC at FL 70. The radar controller tells you set the Mumbai QNH 1007

and descend to and maintain 4500ft. The transition level is FL50. What do you

do?

A) _ Tell the radar controller that you cannot accept his clearance as you are above
the transition level.

3) Level 1013 set until at FL50 then set 1007 and descend to 4500ft.

C) Set 1007 immediately and advise leaving 7000ft for 4500ft.

678

--- Page 346 ---

46.

47.

49.

50.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS

Which of the following is NOT an approved method of radar identification using
SSR?

A) Squawk handover from another radar controller.

B) Track observation and position reports.

C) Use of the IDENT function.

What information is contained in an AIC?

A) Major changes to Search and Rescue facilities.

B) Information that does not qualify for inclusion in the AIP.
C) Abetter printed version of a NOTAM.

Who is responsible when damage is caused by an aeroplane to persons or

property on the ground?

A) The Operator.

B) The pilot actually flying or at the controls when the incident happened.

C) The commander is responsible providing that no other person can be held
responsible.

ATIS is normally provided

A) _ to replace the FSS.

B) to relieve frequency congestion.

C) _ for the rapid updating weather forecasts.

“ASDA” (Acceleration Stop Distance Available) is:

A) _ The length of the take-off run available plus the length of the clearway.

B) The length of the take-off run available plus the length of stopway (if stopway
is provided).

C) The length of the runway plus the length of stopway available (if stopway
provided).

679

AIR REGULATIONS

ANSWERS

U2 es es ee po 2 ys pal
jc }aAteliciseliajlsicialaj/se lass |B

[15 | 16 | 7 | 18 | 19 | 20 | 24 | 22 | 23] 24 | 25 | 26 | 27 | 28 |
Bb i[eicilalalalelelclaltetc{e ic!

| 20 | 30 | 31 | 32 | 33 | 34 | 36 | 36 | 37 | 38] 30 | 40 | 41 | 42 |
pete }ate |e laltcicjajajc}] se

43 [44 | 45 [46 [47 [48 | 49 | 50 |
.clelc |e (es ljalsie|

680


--- Page 347 ---
Consolidated by
Jay unjiya
unjiyajay777@gmail.com
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS AIR REGULATIONS

Consolidated by
Jay unjiya
unjiyajay777@gmail.com

681 682

--- Page 348 ---

So LIST OF DY MATERIAL FOR PPL, CPL & ATPL EXAMS CONDUCT DGCA
Title Author Price Title Author Price ST OF STU J CTED BY
(Rs.) (Rs.) Title Author Price Title Author Price
SSS O—O™E——EELlLLLLL——-L_—EEE—_—E_E_E__=_=_ (Rs.) (Rs.)
Meteorology for ATPL Logbook —————————————————————————————————— =— ET
Aviation Meteorology IC Joshi 795.00 Flight Crew Logbook SBH 150.00 PPLG (Composite) Air Navigation for CPL
EASA ATPL GTS Meteorology BOOk # 9 Oxford 6,317.50 Personal Flying Logbook SBH 450.00 Air Law and ATC Procedures Nordian 5,479.50 Air Navigation Trevor Thom 2,185.00
Ground Studies For Pilot- Meteorology Underdown 825.00 Professional Pilot Logbook SBH 850.00 Air Navigation Trevor Thom 2,185.00 Air Navigation (CPL/ATPL) 2nd Ed RK Bali 950.00
& Standen Jeppesen Pilot Logbook Jeppesen 2,200.00 Air Navigation (CPL/ATPL) 2nd Ed RKBali 950.00 Aviation Radiotelephony Guide Vol. Practical © R.K Bali 800.00
Meteorology Nordian 7,418.40 Jeppesen Professional Pitot Logbook Jeppesen 4,175.00 Air Pilot’s Manual Vol.2 Aviation Law Trevor Thom 2,185.00 & Voll Viva 4th Ed
ee NN. — and Meteorology EASA ATPL GTS Flight Planning & Monitorin Oxford 5,220.25
Radio Aids & Instruments for ATPL ; Pilot Supplies Air Regulations RK Bali 850.00 Book #7 elie e
Avionics and Fight Managemert forthe caminohe: = EES Ehit hoengati = Et ape) a — ivraft Act 1934, India 496.00 EASA ATPL GTS Insirumentation Book § Oxtord 6,317.50
Professional Pilot == Flight Computer ~ E6b (Metal) Jeppesen 4,449.04 Aircraft Rules 1920,1937, 1954 & 2003 India EASA ATPL GTS Mass & Balance Performance Oxford 5,220.25
EASA ATPL GTS Instrumention Book #5 Oxford 6,317.50 Circular Flight Computer - Cr -2 Jeppesen 3,794.00 Aviation Meteorology ; IC Joshi 795.00 Bock # 6
EASA ATPL GTS Radio Navigatio Book #11 Oxford 4,175.25 Circular Flight Computer - Cr -3 Jeppesen 3,924.00 Aviation Radiotelephony Guide Voll Practical RK. Bal 800.00 EASA ATPL GTS Operational Procedures . Oxford 4,175.25
Instrumentation Aircraft General Knowledge Nordian 7,418.40 CX-3 Flight Computer (5 Years Warranty) ASA 12,500.00 & Voll Viva 4th Ed Book # 12
Radio Navigation 2017 Nordian 5,226.60 E6-B Flight Gomputer (Meta) ASA 3,270.00 Basic Aviation Meteorology GKodanda Ram 275.00 EASA ATPL GTS Radio Navigation Book #11 Oxford 4,175.25
Radio Navigation and Instrument Flying Trevor Thom 2,660.00 E6-B Flight Computer (Paper) ASA ; 1,414.00 Communications Nordian 4,046.40 Flight Planning 2017 (PB) Nordian 4,973.70
Technical General for ATPL/CPL ATPL/CPL — E6B Electronic Flight Computer Sporty's 9,000.00 DGCA Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) DGCA 9,500,00 Instrumentation Aircraft General Knowledge Nordian 7,418.40
oe re ennitres sal rT PLOTTERS EASA ATPL GTS Air Law Book # 1 Oxford 4,175.25 Mass & Balance Flight Performance and Planning Nordian 3,034.80
E ASA ATPL nS pivotal A ’ semen i? Cont 529095 Fixed Plotters PN-1 Jeppesen 1,305.00 EASA ATPL GTS CommunicationsBook #14 Oxford 2,612.50 Operational Procedures Nordian 5,226.60
PL GTS Electrics & El youn Book # 3 Oxtord 5,220.25 Rotating Plotters PJ-1 Jeppesen 1,570.00 EASA ATPL GTS Flight Planning & Monitoring Oxford 5,220.25 Radio Navigation 2017 (PB) Nordian 5,226.60
EASA AT _— ae a 0 ns rd 5,220.95 Rotating Plotters ASA 1,855.00 Book # 7} Radio Navigation and Instrument Flying Trevor Thom 2,660.00
EASA ATPL GTS Powerplant Boo ‘ yea Fixed Plotters ASA 1,635.00 EASA ATPL GTS Human Performance & Oxtord §,220,.25" |
EASA ATPL GTS Principles Of Flight Book #13 © Oxford 6,317.50 eee Limitation Book # 8 : Meteorology for CPL
Electrics Aircraft General Knowledge Nordian 5,058.00 . ' , EASA ATPL GTS M: 990.25 Aviation Meteorology IC Joshi 795.00
Powerplant Aircraft General Knowledge Nordian 5,479.50 a ot cacao ASA 1S. wee all ai EASA ATPL GTS Meteorology Book 9 Oxford 6,317.50
Principle of Fight Nordian 8,008.50 (Lifetime Warranty) Fli ina Fl Ground Studies for Pilots — Meteorology Underdown 825.00
light Planning Flight Performance & Planning ——-Nordian 4,973.70
: EPAULETTES + TIES + CAP ‘ & Standen
Test Guides Single Bar (Golden) SBH 200.00 From the Ground Up Himalayan Book = 795.00 . 4
itine T Pilot Test Prop: ASA 3,706.29 ag a Sat Human Performance & Limitations Nordian 5,816.70 Meteorology Nordian 7418.40
2019 Aine Transport Plat Te p _— Two Bars (Golden) SBH Pome Human Performance & Limitations In Aviation Campbell 700,00 i ;
i ini ; Three Bars (Golden) SBH ao Mass & Balance Flight Performance Nordan 0349 Al Regulation for ATPL/CPI.
Air Pilot's Manual Vol 8: PPL Question & Answers P Godwin 2,850.00 Four Bars (Golden) SBH 275.00 and Planning 9 oe Air Law and ATC Procedures Nordian 5,479.50
to Accompany the Air Pilot's Manuals Black Tie SBH 250.00 pen Bt . , Air Regulations RK Bali 850.00
Aircraft Technical Question Bank For CPL & SBH 400.00 Peak Cap SBH 950.00 Private Pilo FAA Airman Knowledget Test Guide © Jeppessen 1,934.69 Aircraft Act 1934 India 496.00
ATPL Exams _ KNEE PADS PPLT (Tech. Gen) Aircraft Rules 1920, 1997, 1954 & 2003 India
Sel EC ERECT SACO ce SIE Tri-Fold Knee Pads (IFR) ASA 4,600.00 Air Navigation (CPL/ATPL) 2nd Ed RK Bal 950.00 DGCA Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) DGCA 7,000.00
Test Guide TrieFold Knee Pads (VFR) ASA 4,600.00 Airframes and Systems Airorat . Nordian 6,069.60 EASA ATPLGTS AirLawBook#1 == Oxford 4,175.25
Commercial Pilot Test Prep 2019 ASA 4,851.29 Tri-Fold Knee Pads (IFR) Jeppesen 7,000.00 General Knowledge EASA ATPL GTS Human Performance & Limitation Oxford 5,220.25
rel Ne ei i hl A i 888.75 _TeFold Knee Pads (VER) Jeppesen 5,655.00 Aviation Radiotelephony Guide VoLI Practical —-RK.Bali goo.og «Book #8
Air Law Examination Preparation (PB) IFR Knee Board ASA 1,950.00 & Vol.ll Viva 4th Ed ; Human Performance & Limitations Nordian 5,816.70
EASA PPL (A) & (H) Que. Ans. & Expl, Exam 4 Pooley’s 688.75 VER Knee Board ASA 1,950.00 EASA ATPL GTS Airframe & Systems Book #2 Oxford 5,220.25 AirNavigalionforATPL = = =
Reiemoiogy Prarinadin Propet (PB) ; Folding Lap Board ASA 3,285.00 EASA ATPL GTS Electrics & Electronics Book # 3. Oxford 5,220.25 eRe cEeaieee:  wint _—
Ey ain wings EASAATPL GTS Instrument ation Book #5 Oxiord 6,317.50 ot a 9 9 aa
gerald song ot os 688.75 Brass Wings (High Quality SBH 250.00 peeling let tee Oxtrod 5,220.25 EASA ATPL GTS General Navigation Book # 10 Oxford 6,317.50
EASA PPL (A) & (H) Que. Ans. & Expl. ley srt a ek / ele EASA ATPL GTS principles Of flight book #13 Oxtrod 6,317.50 EASA ATPL GTS Mass & Balance Performance Oxford 5.290.95
este ae /—_ 693,75 Calculator Electrics Aircraft General Knowledge Norian 5,058.00 oe : ea:
‘ UB. ANS. p = 7 . Casio FX 82 MS Scientific Calculator Casio 425.00 ‘ Instrumentation Aircraft General Knowledge Nordian 7,418.40 -
ees Precieca: Ea Phere (FS) 5; Casio FX 991 MS Scientific Calculator Casio 825.00, Powerplant Aircraft General Knowledge Nordian 5,479.50 a. phe et ae ase Es
Ean J Mie aah Ea Enotes acres ane Casio FX 991 ES Plus Scientfic Calculator ©» Casio 995.00 Principle of Flight Nordian 8,008.50 Fight Plaming 2017 (P8) — —
a pe chee dys 5 a ee Radio Navigation and Instrument Flying Trevor Thom 2,660.00 General Navigation 2017 Nordian 78.40
we. Ans. & Expl, Exam ley . ags f ; ; ae
Navigation Examination Preparation . (PB) © x bag SBH 4,000.00 All Pilot Supplies are inclusive of GST and other levies Mass & Balance Flight Performance and Planning Nordian 3,034.80
EASA PPL (A) Que. Ans. & Expl. Exam 8 Aircraft Pooley's 688.75 SBH Pilot Bag (With Wheels) SBH 8,000.00 oaniemeara ee , Operational Procedures Nordian 5,648.10
General Exam. Prep. (PB) Headset Case SBH 1,100.00 o Prices are subject to change without notice.
EASA PPL (A) Que. Ans. & Expl. Exam 9 Fight  Pooley’s 688.75 = 1050.00
Performance & Planning Exam. Prep. (PB) Fuel Tester .
Instrument Oral Exam ASA 960.89 Jeppesen Fuel Tester Jeppesen 2,478.00 a ISBN: 978-81-7598-196-6
Instrument Rating FAA Airman Knowledge Jeppesen 2,440.49 ASA Fuel Tester ASA 915.00 . .
st aig Pra 2019 rsh agna9 Student Aids Sterling Book House
Private Pilot FAA Airman Knowledge Test Guide Jeppesen 4,934.69 Overcasters i sen hr 1S0 9001 : 2015
Private Pilot Oral Exam ASA 960.89 Oe = ‘ase to 181, Dr. D.N. Road, Fort, Mumbai 400 001. INDIA
Private Pilot's Test Prep 2019 ASA 1,480.29 ifynood ASA 1490.00 Tel: (+91 22) 22612521, 22659599, 22676046
490, ft
bookhouse.co! S"768l7s"Faldes

Fax: (+91 22) 22623551. email: in
All Pilot Supplies are inclusive of GST and other levies Prices are subject to change without notice. Website: www.sterling

‘o@sterlingbookhouse.com
kh m

